Balochistan University Staffers Protest Funds Scarcity QUETTA - Scores of teachers and staff of the University of Balochistan continued their protest against the govt for not providing adequate financial assistance, paralysing educational activities at the largest and oldest state-run varsity of the province.The teachers and other staff staged a unique type of protest by begging outside the Chief Minister House, and announced to set up a camp at Quetta Hockey Chowk from Dec 6. The decision to this effect was taken by the Balochistan University Joint Action Committee during a protest demonstration outside the varsity gate.Addressing on the occasion, Academic Staff Association members Dr Kaleemullah Bareech, Prof Abdul Baqi Jattak, Haji Abdul Aziz Langov, Alam Khan Kharoti and others said that the government has failed to substantiate its promises made during the May 11 General Elections. They said there is no money to be paid as far as salaries of the UoB teachers and other staffs are concerned.How the dream of higher education could be fulfilled under such circumstances,” they said and added that the sitting UoB vice chancellor did not have the capacity to run the varsity affairs.They demanded the government to sack the incumbent VC and run the varsity in accordance with the University Act 1996.
Dera Bugti Under Siege We are not scared and will fight back, they are mistakenif they think they are superior and can eliminate us”(Nawab Sahib)Construction of Deep-Sea-Port GwadarThe announcement of General Musharraf of the construction of Deep-See-Port Gwadar in 2002 further triggered the new phase of violence between the Baloch Nationalist and the Federal Government of Pakistan. It is worth by mentioning that during the hottest months of June and July of 2002 about 50, 000 paramilitary laid siege to Dera Bugti, the headquarter of the Bugti tribe and the ancestral town of Nawab Bugti, which left the local population without electricity, water, telephone and medical facilities.Undoubtedly, the siege of Dera Bugti widened the gap of conflict between the Bugti’s and Military governmentNawab Sahib immediately protested strongly by saying;“His own area lacked electricity & gas while the Sui gas warms houses in Punjab, Sindh and Paktunkwa (formerly NWFP) provinces of Pakistan and being used for domestic and Industrial needs also”.(Nawab Sahib)In response to the military operation on Dera Bugti, the Bugti tribesmen started their resistance by carrying out raids in early 2003. They attacked the main gas pipelines causing widespread anger through out the country. Meanwhile the Marri militants also joined with Bugti’s. They jointly took furious action and compelled the government to talk to Nawab Sahib in order to defuse the confrontation in his area and discuss the package of constitutional, economic and other concessions to fuse the anger and frustration of the people of related area of Balochistan.CantonmentsInstead of the dialogues and the constitutional way to ease the situation, the military government added fuel into the fire by announcing in 2004 to construct three more Cantonments in Sui, Kohlu and on the Coastal town of Gwadar. The above announcement was seen as a means to further tighten federal control over the province and the apprehension was not without basis. While rejecting the construction of the cantonments, Bugti and  Marri armed forces along with other Baloch militants started their serious reactions against the Pakistan Forces from 2004. The clashes between the Bugti resistance forces and security forces of Pakistan began in 2002 and their frequency increased in 2004 and 2005. This was caused by the disgraceful event of a woman doctor named Shazia Khalid who was raped on January 2, 2005 by Captain Hammad in the hospital of the Pakistan Petroleum Limited (PPL) in Bugti Tribal Territory of the province of Balochistan. This was followed by military operation on Dera Bugti and Kohlu.“We doubt the government’s intentions. We fear the government has been strengthening army presence in the province in order to crush the nationalist’s sentiments at any given moment. The government has engaged in undeclared military operations in Balochistan, particularly in areas strongly dominated by the Baloches”.(Dr Abdul Hayee Baloch)The Rape of lady Doctor“Rape is a heinous crime”(Nawab  Sahib)It is worth noting that the honour of woman is indeed one of the most sensitive of ‘Baloch Code of Honour’. In fact, women have an honourable status in Baloch society. It should be mentioned here that for centuries, the Chiefs of the Baloches are the main custodians of the Baloch society and they are the Martial Administrator as well as judicial head of their tribes.When Shazia Khalid was raped, Nawab Sahib, as the chief of the area, using his traditional power demanded the alleged rapist to be arrested and be handed over to him so that he should be tried under the Baloch traditions. This demand was not only rejected but covered up by the authorities concerned including General Musharraf himself. The rape of the doctor and consequent manner of covering up the incident however provoked the Nawab and his tribesmen.In fact, the rape was a pre-planned and well-organized drama against Nawab Sahib especially and the Baloch nation generally. The director of the whole drama just wanted an excuse for the military operation against Bugti’s, Marri’s and then all Baloches of Balochistan. No doubt, he succeeded in exploiting and dragged them into the most dreadful battle ever fought in Balochistan.In response to the rape incident the fearless and death-defying Bugti’s, along with war like Marri militants, attacked the Sui gas fields. They blew up the gas installations at Sui, which forced the company to evacuate its personnel from the area disrupting gas supply across Pakistan for several weeks. The subsequent armed clashes between Baloch militants and the security forces resulted in scores of deaths on both sides. Since then a new phase of violation took place in Bugti area.“At the end of a five-day battle, in which the tribesmen stormed the gas company compound, eight people, including three soldiers, were killed and 35 people wounded. The army rushed thousands of troops and paramilitary forces to Sui. The rebels were heavily armed, well trained and organised, using sophisticated satellite telephones. They fired 430 rockets and 60 mortar rounds at the Sui plant.”(Aftab Ahmed Sherpao; Interior Minister of Pakistan, 2005)General Musharraf immediately sent tanks, helicopters and extra 4,500 soldiers to crush them. In retribution, security forces targeted civilian populations and fired hundreds of rockets and mortar shells at residential areas in Sui, killing and injuring innocent people including women and children.They   searched house-to-house by 7,000 regular troops plus Frontier Corps (FC) supported by amour, artillery and gun-ships. The houses were bulldozed and more than 1,500 insurgent attacks were mounted through out the province, culminating in a pitched battle between the FC and Bugti tribe’s people.Nawab Sahib told Hamid Mir (journalist)“Clashes in Sui were in reaction to the incident of criminal assault on a lady doctor in which security guards were involved, but instead of arresting the accused and taking action against them, the PPL management and high-ups of Defence Services Group tried to hide this heinous crime. The incident of criminal assault was a stigma on Baloch society and people reacted to it when no action was taken against the accused.”“The reaction was appropriate and fitting. It was exactly according to our traditions, culture and social practices. Whenever a tribe’s honour or prestige is at stake, this is the way one should react. If you read our history, people have given their lives to protect women, their honour and their livestock. The reaction was only to punish those who committed this wild, dirty act.”(Nawab Sahib)On January 10, 2005, President Pervez Musharraf, on Pakistan television, warned the Baloch nationalists;“Don’t push us … it is not the 1970s, and this time you won’t even know what has hit you”The warning of Musharraf was an open challenge to all Baloches and the situation, in fact, went out of control. The Baloch leaders immediately challenged the army of Pakistan.“Here, we are ruled by a class which does not recognize logic, history, ground realities, democracy. The only language it knows is that of violence and brute force,” On the top of it, they say the Baloch are rebels, getting money from the outside world.”                                                                                                  (Nawab Khair Baksh Khan Marri)“General Musharraf had power and was enjoying the support of the United States. It was not for the first time that President Musharraf had criticized nationalists as he issued such warnings also during his visit to Quetta, Gwadar and other areas in the recent past and was again warning of military action”“General Sahib Pervez Musharraf has promised to hit us in such a way that we will not know what hit us. In one sense, he is promising quick death us. They could do this to a few Baloch leaders, but not the whole Baloch nation.” His promised ‘quick death’ has come, but in death, as in life, he appears poised to remain the rallying force for the Baloch.“We are not scared and will fight back they are mistaken if they think they are superior and can eliminate us.”(Nawab  Sahib)“The Baloch people would not allow the usurpers to loot the resources of the province and deny the local people’s constitutional and political rights.”(Nawabzada Balach Marri)Responding to the warning of General Pervez Musharraf the Bugti tribesmen along with fellow comrades on 11 January 2005 attacked the country’s largest gas producing plant at Sui resulting in damaging the main pipe line by cutting the gas supply to the whole country for at least a week or two. This confirmed that there was to be ‘no surrender at any cost’. Military Attack on Dera BugtiIt was on March 17, 2005 Musharraf came up with a more inhuman plan to use all available air and ground power to eliminate Nawab Sahib .The military forces started shelling the town of Dera Bugti, the head- quarter of Bugti tribe and the ancestral Fort of Dera Bugti of the Nawab. Rockets and mortars also targeted his house where he was attending a meeting with his tribesmen, but he survived. During the daylong operation more than 77 civilians were killed, among them were innocent 33 Hindu worshipers, including children men, women and more than 100 people were severely injured with the severe damage to the houses including Mosque and a Hindu temples. The operation expanded to residential areas of Dera Bugti where hundred of men, women, children and livestock were killed by ground and aerial attacks indiscriminately.After the operation of Dera Bugti Marri and Bugti resistance forces were engaged in a guerrilla war with the Pakistan security forces. However, this was not the first military operation on Dera Bugti. Prior to this the first expedition was made by Khan of Kalat in 1820 and the second under Major Billamore in 1839 with the third one by the governor of  Sindh General, Charles Napier in 1844; fortunately all failed to subdue the Bugti’s.Peace AgreementSecurity forces and army continued such bullets, bullying, harassments and killing on a daily bases. Even then, Nawab Sahib, being a traditional Baloch, did not shut the doors of dialogue and reconciliation. He was approached by Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, the Chairperson of the ruling party, i.e. Muslim League (Q) and the Secretary General, Mushahid Hussian Syed, indeed he honoured them. At last, on March 23, 2005 they made the peace agreement.  Unfortunately, as usual, General Parvez Musharraf vetoed the peace agreement and the Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz refused the general amnesty. All the posts vacated by Bugti tribesmen after the March agreement they were occupied by army troops. Heavy artillery guns and armoured cars were deployed along the roads leading from Sui to Dera Bugti.In December 2005 addressing a newspaper editors’ meeting in Lahore, Musharraf thundered‘There are two or three tribal chiefs and feudal lords behind what is going on in Balochistan. The past governments have made deals with them and indulged them. My government is determined to establish its writ. It will be a fight to the finish”.Military operation on Marri Area on DecemberThe ongoing operation was now extended to many other Baloch areas. Thousands of para-military and regular troops with heavy machine-gun and artillery moved into the Bugti areas. Dera Bugti looked like a town under siege with heavily armed para-military troops positioned on the surrounding hills and check posts set up at the entry points.After the Sui incident, the deadly attacks and counter attacks between Baloch fighters and security forces were continued, but the situation intensified when on December 14, 2005 the militants launched a series of rocket attacks during President General Pervez Musharraf’s visit to a newly constructed army cantonment in Kohlu. The next day a rocket hit an army helicopter carrying the Inspector General, Frontier Corps, Major General Shaukat Zamir Dar, and his deputy, Brigadier Saleem Nawaz.The war on the terrorists now diverted troops and U.S. supplied weaponry from Al-Qaeda and Taliban to Bugti and Marri areas along with the US supplied weaponry. The operation now expanded to the Marri area, where on 17th December 2005 Pakistan Army launched an army operation against innocent Marri Baloch people throughout Kohlu District, parts of Dera Bugti, Noshki, Makran District and other parts of Balochistan. More than thirty thousand army personnel, twelve Gunship helicopters, four fighter jets, and several spy planes of different sizes, heavy artillery and missiles were used. The result of 10 days of intensive bombing and shelling by army jets, gunship helicopters and heavy artillery was the killing of at least 86 people and more than 100 seriously wounded. Shamefully most victims were women and young children.Breaking Peace AgreementWhen Pakistani security forces moved into Kohlu district on December 18 to start their long awaited operations in Balochistan, they broke the peace agreement of March 23, 2005 that had lasted for nine months since the violent confrontation in Dera Bugti. The Baloch resisting forces continued unabated despite the use of aircraft, helicopter gun ships and tanks against them by General Pervez Musharraf.  These reinforcements and intensified air strikes have not been able to subdue the nationalists as would be evident from some of the latest incidents reported in the Pakistani media.Despite having started in Kohlu district the conflict engulfed most of Kohlu and Dera Bugti districts but insurgents were challenging the writ of the State virtually across the entire length and breadth of Balochistan by targeting railway lines, gas pipelines and electricity and communication towers.“The Bugti tribe owns the land which contains Pakistan’s largest natural gas fields. However, the majority of the tribesmen live in abject poverty, with no employment or basic health and education facilities. We are fighting for the control of our national wealth and for our political rights,”(Nawab Sahib)“It is a bitter fact that unlike the fortunate inhabitants of many Middle East Countries, the Bugti’s as a whole do not receive a single paisa as royalties from the production of natural gas in their own land”. (Sylvia Matheson; Tiger of Balochistan)ConclusionIt is a hair raising fact that the rape of a female doctor on January 2, 2005 completely changed the relationship between Baloches and the government of Pakistan forever. Actually, the year 2005 Bugti and Marri lands were the scene of pitched battles fought between security forces and the Baloch nationalists. No doubt, the year 2005 marked the fifth round of battle ever fought between the Baloch resistance forces and Pakistan forces. Unfortunately, this continues until today.No doubt, the world watched with amusement as General Pervez Musharraf declared an all-out war on Balochistan; on Dera Bugti, Kohlu, Makran, Jalawan and particularly Nawab Sahib.
An Immortalizing March. An influential attempt for the nation’s abducted missing people’s recovery, commencing in October from Quetta finally reached Karachi in the last week of November. The extensively exhausting journey of 756 kilometers by fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, daughters and sons of the either missing or martyred Balochs holding the photos of their loved ones, walking constantly with blistered and swollen feet in seek of justice, kept on moving on their way to Karachi.The peaceful and civilized demonstration along with people of different ages generates painful chronicles hidden behind each participant. Mama Qadeer, Farzana Baloch, Sammi Baloch, Bibi Gul, Samina Baloch, Ali Haider Baloch only ten and noticeably hundreds of other Baloch families suffering with heart-wrenching stories, where as many of them waiting or mourning for their loved ones. Their sorrows obliged them to take the initiative to be a part of the marching rally. These are the same people who have sat in the hunger-strikes numerous times in front of the high court and the Supreme Court struggling from four years seeking for the peaceful recovery of their loved ones but their voice was still unheard or ignored. According to the participants of the Long March by Voice for Baloch Missing Persons, the trusts over the national media and institutes have ended and they only want to appreciate BBC and Vsh news for their coverage.“We decided this Long March for the attention of International Community. United Nations Organization should take notice of on-going human rights violations in Balochistan” said a participant. Leading the convention and addressing to the 20,000 people according to Vsh news in Karachi, Mama Qadeer the father of slain Jaleel Reqi said “The struggle has not ended here. We will march to UN headquarters or find some other peaceful but effective way to continue to raise our voice.”Abductions of 18,000 people from different areas across Balochistan, along with 1500 abducted men have been killed under-custody and their bodies have been dumped in different areas of Balochistan and Karachi. Mama Qadeer Baloch added: “Most of the victims of target killing were highly conscious and educated members of Baloch society including lawyers, doctors, students, poets, university lecturers, teachers and other professional people.Full of hardships, but with strong will, they marched with obsession committing to continue the struggle. Gaining overwhelming momentum, the Long March finally reached Karachi where more people joined the march. The march which began with a few people was followed by hundreds and the participants were warmly welcomed by thousands of people. Apart from Baloch activists a great number of Sindhi and other human rights and political activists also come to support the march.Having importance, this march is a symbol of the injustice going on from decades and shows that certainly something is bothering the province today. On the other hand governor of Balochistan Mohammed Khan Achkzai declares that everything in the province is going well. Without a doubt, we can assume how well-informed our governor is. On the other hand, Dr Malik named it a “seasonal march” while it’s an unforgettable historical march of Baloch nation.The abhorrent silence over the issue will not keep this matter in dark any longer. The sacrifices and efforts of the participants will remain everlastingly. Categorically this march possesses immense significance not only for Baloch nation but for all those people who stipulate humanity and are anti human rights violation.
A Long March to Karachi. After traveling from Quetta to Karachi on foot, relatives of Baloch missing persons and their supporters ended a 780 kilometers protest march on November 22.The rally was led by Mama Qadeer Baloch, vice chairman of the Voice of Baloch Missing Persons (VBMP), and included more than 20 women, children and activists. “We will not hesitate to protest against disappearances and extrajudicial killings of Baloch people even if we have to walk to Islamabad and knock the doors of the United Nations headquarters,” he said.The military has been conducting an operation against separatist groups in Balochistan since 2000. Hundreds of people have gone missing since the operation began, according to reports by human rights organizations and Baloch nationalist parties. They are believed to have been abducted by security agencies. The bodies of some of the missing people began turning up on roadsides, further aggravating the situation.The Supreme Court has heard cases about the ‘forced disappearances’ and formed several commissions, but failed to push the authorities to either release the victims or hold a transparent investigation into the issue.Mama Qadeer’s struggle for the recovery of missing persons began in February 2009 when his son Jalil Reiki was taken away allegedly by security agencies. “He knocked every possible door and explored every possible option for the recovery of his son,” he said. His dead body was found in November 2012.Amongst the marchers is Farzana Majeed, whose student leader brother Zakir Majeed has gone missing. “We want our brothers and sons back home without delay,” she said.Leaders of the VBMP say more than 18,000 Baloch men have been abducted by security agencies since the killing of prominent Baloch leader Nawab Akbar Bugti in August 2006. “Of them, 1500 were teachers and students,” said Mama Qadeer. “Many of them were killed.”An official of a Pakistani human rights watchdog group put the number of Baloch missing persons between 800 and 1000. There have been no official figures so far.Most of these missing men belong to Kohlu, Khuzdar, Mastung, Mashkay and Awaran.
Chief Minister Tells UNHCR Afghan Refugees Cause of Trouble in Balochistan. QUETTA: A delegation of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), headed by its Pakistan representative Neill Wright, called on Chief Minister Balochistan, Dr Abdul Malik Baloch, here on Wednesday.UNHCR’s Balochistan representative Fabio Varoli was also present at the meeting.The delegation informing Chief Minister Balochistan about the Afghan refugees said that 450732 registration cards had been issued to refugees in the province. “94219 refugees voluntarily repatriated to their country during 2007 to 2012 while 8242 refugees have gone to their country this year,” the delegation added.On the occasion, Chief Minister stressed upon the need of creating conducive atmosphere in Afghanistan so that Afghan refugees could go back to their country. He told the delegation that Afghan refugees were living in different parts of unmeeting3Balochistan for the last three decades and owing to their presence the province was facing problems.“The presence of Afghan refugees is affecting every sector in the province,” he added.CM Balochistan emphasized upon international community to address the needs and difficulties of the countries hosting refugees.
Balochistan After Justice Chaudhary. An ongoing hearing at the Supreme Court of Pakistan about the law and order situation in Balochistan indicates that the judiciary and the executive branches of the government are not on the same page. The Attorney General Munir A. Malik told the Chief Justice, Ifthakar Mohammad Chaudhary, the other day that some of the missing persons may be dead by now. Quoting unnamed intelligence sources, the Attorney General said the covert agencies justified the killing of the missing persons by saying that they could not wait for the latter to strangulate the army soldiers. On his part, the Chief Justice, who has been a longstanding crusader for the recovery of the missing persons, asked the Attorney General how come the missing persons or their families posed a threat to the national security when they had set a new precedence by peacefully walking from Quetta to Karachi.The issue of enforced disappearance is alarmingly sliding from the government agenda and the media attention. During Wednesday’s hearing, the Attorney General admitted that if any of the missing persons were ever released, it was by the virtue of Supreme Court pressure. The Chief Justice has been trying to argue that the issue of the missing persons is totally different from the of law and order crisis in the province, the government representatives try to mix up both the matters in order to dilute the whole issue.Substantial evidence has been put forward the Chief Justice confirming the involvement of the Frontier Corps and intelligence agencies affiliated with the Pakistan army in the missing persons’ case. The Chief Justice has, however, not been able to take solid action against the personnel of the army and the security forces simply because these organizations enjoy absolute impunity for their actions.As Justice Chaudhary prepares to retire from an eventful stint as the Chief Justice, one fears that the issue of missing persons will further encounter a setback. The governments of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and Dr. Malik Baloch seem to intentionally ignore talking about the issue of the missing persons as they believe it is not worth a confrontation with the army whose approval is absolutely essential for the very survival of the democratic government. Saying that the missing persons should be recovered and taking actual measures to make that happen are to utterly different things. The civilian government does condemn the disappearances but does nothing to recover those who have gone missing.What we have learnt from the past is that different governments have cited diverse reasons to put into context the issue of missing persons but all of the government versions are totally unacceptable. Neither it is easy to believe that the missing persons have voluntarily gone overseas nor is it true (without a conviction) that they are linked with any terrorist groups. Every citizen who has not been proven guilty is innocent and deserves a fair trial.Justice Chaudhry’s legacy will be defined, rather redefined, by his success in ensuring the safe recovery of the missing Baloch persons. His failure to do so, on the other hand, will have catastrophic consequences for the state of human rights in Balochistan. We are left with too little time.
Balochistan Earthquake: Pakistan Continues to Block Foreign Aid Earthquake victims suffer as Pakistan denies foreign aid in Awaran, a district in south-western Balochistan region that was devastated by two major earthquakes in September, claiming more than 600 lives, leaving hundreds injured and more than 100,000 people homeless.  The Pakistani government barred the UN relief workers as well as international aid group Doctors Without Border despite repeated offers to help in quake-hit areas. The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), headed by an army general, maintains it has the situation in Awaran under control.Dr. Malik Baloch, Chief Minister Balochistan, has urged the federal government to allow foreign aid agencies in Awaran.‘’Rehabilitation is not possible without foreign aid,” the Chief Minister said.Pakistan army has maintained a tight control over the relief efforts amid a continuing nationalist insurgency in Balochistan.The Baloch nationalists fighting the Pakistani government for a separate homeland fear the army may launch fresh operations against them if forces increase deployment in Awaran.On October 20th, the Inter-services Public Relations (ISPR), the media wing of the army, insisted in a statement that its presence was only meant for relief work not for initiating an operation’’.Hammal Haider, a London-based leader of the Baloch National Movement (BNM), ,, disputed the army’s claim‘‘Last month, the army caused many casualties in Mashkay town by firing rockets. Forces abducted the ten-year old son and many relatives of our party’s secretary general,” he said.“The government should allow international aid agencies to ensure impartial humanitarian assistance to the victims.’’The army has, however, authorized banned religious groups, such as the Jash-e-Muhammad and the Jamaat-ud-Dawa to enter Awaran.Another Baloch leader, Javid Mengal, who currently lives in Dubai, regretted what he described as the “infestation of the religious elements” in Awaran. He said it was a Pakistani ploy to counter the left-wing Baloch nationalists.Mr. Baloch alleged that the army was using a natural calamity as an opportunity to penetrate radical Islamists in Balochistan to dilute the secular nature of the nationalist movement.‘’The army has been intensely trying to turn Balochistan into a breeding ground for Islamic extremism,’’ he whined.
Washington Should End Pakistan’s Military Assistance: Dr. Tara Chand Dr. Tara Chand BalochBy Malik Siraj AkbarDr. Tara Chand Baloch is the U.S. president of the Balochistan National Party. He formerly served as a Balochistan cabinet minister in Sardar Akhtar Mengal’s government in 1990s. Dr. Baloch, who moved to the United States in early 2000s soon after General Musharraf’s coup in 1999, began his political career as an activist of the Baloch Students Organization. Born in Nasirabad District in 1966, Dr. Baloch attained an M.B.B.S. Degree from Quetta’s Bolan Medical College. He spoke to the media for the first time in many years during an exclusive interview with the The Baloch Hal.Q: What is the significance of the U.S. chapter of the B.N.P.?A: The Balochistan issue dates back to the creation of Pakistan but there is very little awareness in the west, including the United States, about the plight and the aspirations of the Baloch people. It is very important in today’s globalized world to stay connected with foreign governments, policymakers, non-governmental organizations and the media. In order to achieve that fundamental goal, we have started the U.S. chapter of the B.N.P.Q: What are some of the important burning issues related to Balochistan that the world should know?A: I believe Balochistan, in spite of being the land of enormous natural resources and opportunities, has been transformed into a land of sorrow and miseries by Islamabad.Enforced disappearances and dumping of mutilated dead bodies of Baloch people is currently a burning issue that has engulfed Balochistan. The Pakistani intelligence agencies and security forces, while abusing their constitutional authority, have subjected thousands of peaceful Baloch political activists, human rights defenders, students and other professionals. This is an issue of deep concern for us and we urge the international community to press Islamabad to immediately end the cycle of human rights abuse in Balochistan.The B.N.P. believes in Baloch people’s right to self-determination. Since the U.N. Charter recognizes people’s right to self-determination, we want the world to also support the Baloch quest for self-determination because Balochistan was forcefully occupied by Pakistan and its mineral wealth has been exploited for decades. Pakistan has taken advantage of our strategic location, the coast and resources but deprived our people of their fundamental human rights and the dignity they are entitled to as human beings.Q: How is your party’s struggle different from other entities’ struggle?A: All political entities which support the Baloch right for self-determination are fighting for a common goal. However, we may have minor tactical differences. But that is the part and parcel of any national movement. I wish all these forces unite and share a collective strategy to achieve our national goal.Q: How does your party plan to achieve its goal?A: B.N.P.’s power rests with the public. Any political party depends and thrives on public support. Our party has offices and activists at grassroots level across the Baloch land. Many of our top leaders and activists have been martyred, imprisoned and tortured by Pakistani security forces because of their commitment to the Baloch movement. In spite of these challenges, we still remain committed to the people of Balochistan and fight for their national rights.Q: Since you represent the B.N.P. in the United States, what can Washington do to help the Baloch?A: The Balochs are a direct victim of American assistance that goes to the Pakistani army. Instead of fighting extremist groups, Pakistan uses American funding to fight Baloch political forces. If Washington stops Pakistan’s military assistance, most human rights abuses in Balochistan will hopefully end. Dr. Tara ChandQ:  Do you see a change in Islamabad’s policy toward Balochistan after the induction of a Baloch nationalist chief minister, Dr. Malik Baloch and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif’s promise to normalize Balochistan?A: We do not see any changes on the ground in Balochistan even after the general elections. For example, the issue of disappeared people has still not been resolved by the central government. Enforced disappearance is a big crime against humanity. If Islamabad is truly sincere and committed to negotiations with the Baloch, it should, first of all, ensure the unconditional recovery of all the disappeared citizens.Q: Balochistan also has a Pashtun population. How much do they support the Baloch demands?A: Unfortunately, the Pashtuns have not stood with the Baloch at any level during the current struggle. We regret that they are even not playing their role as good neighbors at a time when Baloch youth is routinely subjected to enforced disappearance, torture and murder. Instead of standing beside us at this critical juncture, they only talk about Balochistan whenever it comes to the distribution of Baloch wealth.Q: There have also been a number of deadly attacks on the Shia, Hazara in Balochistan. How does your party view these killings?A: We strongly condemn every attack on the Shia Hazara living in Balochistan. We also fully share their grief because we are the victims of the same mastermind sitting in Islamabad. However, it is very important to know the context and the motives of growing radicalization in Balochistan. Actually, sectarian groups that are involved in these attacks do not belong to Balochistan. They originated from and are currently headquartered in South Punjab. Islamabad prepares and launches these groups in Balochistan to counter the Baloch nationalist movement. Furthermore, the purpose of these attacks is to divert attention from the larger Baloch movement. The Baloch society has historically been secular. The Baloch society does not discriminate anyone based on their faith. The sectarian attacks are sponsored by Pakistan’s intelligence agencies and we have zero tolerance for such attacks.Tc666Q: Do you agree with the new government’s decision to handover the Gwadar Port to the Chinese?A: The Baloch people oppose the government’s decision because we were not taken into confidence in deciding the fate of the Baloch Port. Islamabad should know that only the Balochs can negotiate the fate of the Gwadar Port, the Iran-Pakistan gas pipeline route and Reko Diq gold and copper project. Islamabad should not serve as a middleman to speak on behalf of the Baloch.  If the province of Punjab can directly negotiate with India and China on trade and other issues, why can’t the Baloch have the same right?In fact, Islamabad and China are partners in looting Baloch resources. We do not differentiate between anyone in what the Baloch view as the gang of these two robbers of our wealth. One classic example of Chinese plunder is the Saindik gold Project in which Balochistan only gets 2% of the share as compared to China’s 50% and Islamabad’s 48%.Q: How do you see the future of Balochistan?A: Well, if Islamabad does not review its current policy toward Balochistan, we will be compelled to take a more hardline position. The Baloch did not initiate the conflict. In fact, Islamabad imposed a war on us. Since then, we have received the bullet-riddled, mutilated bodies of Baloch people. Therefore, it is now Islamabad’s responsibility to stop its illegal operations on the Baloch land. We have suffered too much. We cannot take it anymore. Enough is enough.
I Lost My Childhood Searching For My Disappeared Father By Ghulam Farooq Bungalzai The Voice for Baloch Missing Persons is an apolitical organization in Balochistan, the largest province of Pakistan by area. It was formed by the families of missing persons on 27th September 2009 with the sole objective of seeking the safe recovery of their enforced disappeared members by raising voice peacefully on all forums. Since the formation of the organization, the members of the organization have been striving for the safe recovery of missing persons.We have held hundreds of protests and set on token hunger strike camp in front of Quetta, Karachi, Islamabad and nearly all districts of Balochistan, taken out number of rallies for raising the voice against the injustices, violation of human rights in Blaochistan. Since 27th September 2009 till to date, we have knocked at all the doors of the state institutions, including the Supreme Court of Pakistan, but we have failed to get justice from these institution although these institutions were primarily established to provide us justice. We are denied justice because because of the involvement of army and its intelligence agencies in the issue of missing persons.On 27th October 2013, members of the voice for baloch missing persons launched a long march from the capital of Balochistan Quetta to Karachi. The protesters had to travel the long distance of 750 kilometers without using any sort of transportation. They pleaded to travel the distance on foot. Since the binging of the long march from Quetta, the protesters courageously passed passing through various districts of Balochistan. In every district, they are welcomed and joined by the families of missing persons and leaders of different political parties.My father, Ali Asghar Bungulzai has gone missing for more than a decade. When I started my protest to seek his release, I was only a little boy. Today, I have grown up as a man. I, along with the rest of my siblings, restlessly look for my dad every day, everywhere but there is no clue about him. We even don’t know whether he is alive or dead. The State institutions do not feel the pain a child goes through while searching for his missing father. Sadly, I am not the only child currently looking for their fathers. At the Voice for Baloch Missing Persons, there are so many others like me who are either looking for their disappeared fathers, brothers, husbands or beloved ones.The organization of Voice for Baloch Missing Persons has been struggling for years to secure the recovery of those who disappeared years ago. We have taken up the issue to the institutions of the state; conducted scores of peaceful protests, demonstrations and token hunger strike camps in various cities of the country. On several occasions, political leaders came up to our camps and offered assurances that they would support our cause and help in the recovery of our missing family members. We have only received shallow promises from the officials of the provincial and federal political governments. Practically, they have done nothing to provide us justice.Our organization has utilized every available means to highlight awareness about the issue of the missing persons. Despite all our struggle, the issue still persists; it has rather worsened because the government has practically done nothing to recover the missing persons.When all our protests did not move the government, we decided to adopt a unique way of protest by launching a long march from Quetta to Karachi. We marched from Quetta to Karachi along with children, women and elderly Balochs whose family members have gone missing. The main purpose of this protest was to draw the attention of the international community and international human rights organization which are struggling on international forum.The participants of the long march were trying to let the world know what is happening in Balochistan. We tried to educate the international community of its obligations to take the notice of ongoing human rights violation in Balochistan. The long march sent a message to the international community to urge Islamabad to immediately end the extra judicial killings and enforced disappearances in Balochistan.The long march entailed an excruciating and frustrating journey but our resolve was indeed higher than mountains. Nobody forgets a father, son, brother that easily. We will never give up our struggle. Those who don’t understand our struggle have (luckily) never lost a family member. Unless you experience our ordeal, you would not easily understand why we resort to such protests. Well, many in the government, the media and the public simply do not relate to our experiences.We will not give up. Our journey may be arduous and too long but we are determined to go to any extent to reunite with our loved ones. We can, and we will, readily go through more intense physical hardships if that is what is required to help us meet our loved ones. Every price is worth the pleasure of hugging a father, brother, son you was brutally taken away from us many years ago. The brave participants of the long march walked with swollen feet. They remained consistent. Never complained. The long marchers faced dry and cold weather. In spite of these difficulties, the long march successfully moved to its destination. Government authorities even did not offer medical treatment to the participants of the long march. The media intentionally snubbed the long march because for them the issue of missing persons is not important at all. Most media outlets and their correspondents were not seen  covering this historic long march. The Pakistani media indeed disgraced itself by stay on the side human rights abusers.The long march convey a clear message to the provincial and federal governments and the media as well that the missing persons’ issue is not an ordinary one. It has emerged as Pakistan’s most pressing issue which will not fade away only by preventing or discouraging the media from covering it. The missing persons’ issue requires urgent attention and resolution. Our rulers must understand the vitality and sensitivity of the  issue of enforced disappearances in Balochistan and take practical steps to end arbitrary disappearances.The authorities have been procrastinating on the issue of the missing persons without realizing that delaying the resolution of this issue will generate more explosive issues in Balochistan. Its quite clear that the authorities have not paid any heed to the issue of missing persons. On the top of it, they have turned hostile toward the relatives of the missing persons and those who protest seeking their release. The long march symbolized that we are not going anywhere. If our voice is not heard here today, we will go somewhere else. Ours is a journey of hope and success. Ultimately, we will prevail and the day of relief awaits us.The writer is the son of Ali Asghar Bungalzai who disappeared from Balochistan in year 2000 
 Pakistan Long March Ignored by Media About twenty families in Balochistan province of Pakistan are on a journey of protest from one city to another, calling on the government of Pakistan, the UN and the international community to address the issue of Baloch missing persons. But who is listening? Says one of the female marchers, whose husband was abducted in 2010, “The media has been ignoring us. The whole point of this march is to raise the issue of our missing brothers, but how is that possible if the media ignores us? How can we get our message through? The negligence is astonishing.”The Voice for Baloch Missing Person (VBMP) organized the march, which started in Quetta, the capital city of Balochistan and will culminate as a sit-in in Karachi, the capital of Sind. The march, in which the families will cover 730 km on foot, is an attempt to highlight the issue. But for the first 25 days of the march, which is still ongoing, Pakistani media has been largely ignoring the protestors, which some editors confess is due to fears of reprisal. The marchers are expected to reach Karachi in a few days.There is no agreement on the figures of those missing. Nationalist groups in Balochistan claim that up to 18,000 Baloch persons and teenage boys are missing, while independent sources claim that more than 6,000 persons have gone missing after being arrested. The issue of Baloch missing persons is not new. Thousands continue to disappear in Pakistan as a separatist movement simmers in Balochistan.The nationalists say that Balochistan was forcibly annexed in March 1948 and demand a separate homeland where they can live in peace. The Baloch militants have fought five insurgencies against Pakistan security forces, with the first four fought in the isolated tribal areas of eastern Balochistan.During the march, relatives of the abducted chant slogans calling on the government and international human rights organizations to acknowledge the issue and investigate the abduction and murders of their brothers and sons.Among the marchers is the seven-year-old son of Jalil Reki, who was according to the marchers “extrajudicially killed after a year of his disappearance in an ISI torture cell.”Others include Nasrullah Baloch, whose uncle has been missing for 11 years, Mama Qadeer Baloch, whose cousin has been missing since 2001 and whose son was killed during his detention, and Farzana Majeed, whose brother Zakir Majeed Baloch has been missing since 2009 after his arrest by the Frontier Corp (FC). All of these marchers accuse the military and FC of abducting, torturing and killing their loved ones.Farzana Majeed has been fighting to get information about her missing brothers and has spoken out frequently on the issue. During the march, she protested the media blackout and said, “There are women and children protesting peacefully in this march but the media is turning a blind eye, which shows its inequitable approach towards Baloch people.”Added Majeed: “The media should tell us what is our fault? Why are they ignoring our march for the recovery of our loved ones. We have been marching for the past eight days but the media is completely silent and by ignoring our peaceful and democratic protest the media is pushing us against the wall.”The Vice Chairman of VBMP, Qadeer Baloch said ”There are some people who are concerned by the awareness this long march can bring and have started to bully the families of the long marchers back in Quetta.” He added, “The houses of several people of those who have openly shown support for the long march have been raided.”The VBMP official asserts that despite the challenges and continuous threat, the march will continue to its final destination. “Those who thought we will get tired in a day or two should know that there is blood gushing from the feet of our sisters and daughters but they are determined to continue the march at all costs.”The Diplomat sought comment from the military, without success. However, according to other sources, Pakistani officials have repeatedly insisted that they are not involved in abducting or killing Baloch. This is contrary to recent statements by the Balochistan provincial government, which has highlighted the issue of Baloch missing persons and has also given its own figures of those missing.According to groups in Balochistan, since June 2010, 730 missing persons have been extrajudicially killed after their arrest and disappearance. Balochistan government officials confirm the extrajudicial killings of 530 personsduring this time.Early this month when Dr. Abdul Malik, Chief Minister of Balochistan, spoke at the Karachi Press Club about attempts to maintain law and order in Balochistan, he admitted that his government had failed to solve the issue of disappearances. Baloch activists blame his government of not making any efforts to solve the human right abuses carried out in the province. Says activist Faizan Baloch, “It’s a weak government and we did not support the elections, so technically Dr. Malik is not a democratically elected leader.” He adds that the provincial government “has no control over law enforcement agencies to solve the issue of disappearances.”The 20 families of the missing persons from Balochistan meanwhile continue their long march. 
 The Same Game, Different Faces“O! my son, the light of my eyes,If you embrace death and become a martyr for national honour and prestige. I will not weep or cry but would come to your grave with pomp and show,I will sing the song of celebration and happiness,I will sing for each son who is killed for the honour of my land,I will produce another son”(Lullaby of   a mother) Popular Poetry of Balochistan; M.L DamesGwadar is the jewel of Balochistan. Gwadar is the pride of Balochistan. Gwadar is the honour of Balochistan. It is a fact that Gwadar is even a matter of life and death for the Baloch.The deep warm water port of Gwadar is to be found 460 km west of Karachi in Balochistan on the coast of the Arabian Sea. It sits strategically placed at the mouth of the Strait of Hormuz, the oil gateway, at the cusp of the Persian Gulf and its strategic value cannot be overstated. Linking both East and West, Gwadar has enabled Pakistan to cement and even further its reputation in the whole region, extending its influence across the Indian Ocean to South-East Asia and the Far East. The importance of Gwadar has never been greater, not only for the Baloch and Pakistan, but also for a number of the world’s most powerful and influential countries as it now finds itself at the centre of a huge global trade network.Historically, Gwadar has always been a focal point for outside suitors. Russia, in particular, aspired to use Gwadar as a deep warm water port to enhance and protect its military and global trade interests throughout the 20th century. This ambition was only further strengthened by the emerging importance of oil in the latter part of the century and with the invasion of Afghanistan, in 1979, it looked like Russia was making steps to turn this ambition into a reality. Ultimately these machinations did not come to fruition but the importance of the port of Gwadar was not, and has not, been diminished in any way. In fact, the potential influx of cheap Asian gas to the European market, via Gwadar, has only increased their interest in the port’s development as it represents a serious challenge to their dominance in the European gas market.The other great superpower of the late 20th century, the USA, also had a keen eye set upon Gwadar. The Americans understood the potential ramifications of a Soviet stranglehold on the mouth of the Persian Gulf in the late 20th century and the repercussions thereof. Former Secretary of State Edmund Muskie is quoted as saying:“The consequences of a cut-off of Persian Gulf oil, for us in the west, are too disastrous to ignore”.As a result, the Americans set in a motion a plan to stifle the Russian threat. That plan ultimately achieved its aim with the Soviet withdrawal in 1989 but also resulted in the creation of the Taliban with the blessing and support of both Saudi Arabia and Pakistan. In return for his support General Zia-ul-Haq’s government was given tacit approval from the Americans and this helped establish its legitimacy on the global stage.To this day the Americans have kept a watchful gaze on Gwadar and it was claimed by Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti that;“Gwadar was being developed by Pakistan to give facilities to the biggest American Naval Fleet. For this purpose, the entire coastal land stretching 40 miles inland from Karachi to Jiwani including Gwadar would be separated from Balochistan and given to the Americans who will control oil trade in the region and keep Iran under challenge. ‘The biggest American Naval base in South Asia’, would be constructed in Gwadar to facilitate the operation of CENT COM (US Central Command) in the region.”Whether this claim is accurate or not remains to be seen but it is clear that the Americans are concerned and undoubtedly involved, at some level, with the current development of the port at Gwadar, even though its final purpose remains unclear. A document sponsored by Net Assessment, the Pentagon’s office of future-oriented strategies, was published in the Washington Times, in January 2005, stating that:“China is adopting a ‘string of pearls’ strategy of bases and diplomatic ties stretching from the Middle East to southern China that includes a new naval base under construction at the Pakistani port of Gwadar.”This extract appears to clearly contradict the claims of the Nawab, however, he referenced this issue by stating that the current Chinese presence in Gwadar was that only of a “contractor” and once the port development was completed the Chinese would leave and the Americans would ‘take over’.There is, of course, a sizable Chinese contingent in and around the port of Gwadar as they are currently co-developing the port with the federal government. This partnership began in earnest in  April 2002 when President General Pervez Musharraf heralded the start of the Deep-Sea-Port Project in Gwadar with the promise that:“The people of Gwadar and Makran will get ample job opportunities which will raise their standard of living and to transfer the destiny of Balochistan by an equitable distribution of resources”.From the outset many had serious reservations about these claims, not just nationalists, for several reasons. First and foremost, all major aspects of the Gwadar development project were, and continue to be, controlled directly by the federal government with little or no consultation with the Baloch people. How then would the concerns of the local Baloch be heard and addressed?Secondly, other famous and lucrative mega-projects such as the Ormara naval base on the Makran coast, the copper-gold project of Saindak, the Chamalang coal mine and the Sui gas field have all provided no benefit or improvement in the standard of living for the Baloch people. Instead, local people have had to stand by watching helplessly as their land has been plundered and removed from underneath their own feet. An official at the Gwadar Development Authority at the time of the announcement reflected the mood of the local people saying:“The people living in Gwadar are genuinely concerned about the demographic shift after the development of the port. They fear the port city’s massive growth will sideline them and they’ll lose their houses, lands and livelihood”Sadly these concerns have, over time, undoubtedly become realities. Initially, as one would expect, the Chinese brought their own labour with them. Official records show that during the first phase of construction some six hundred Chinese engineers moved to Gwadar. Very few jobs, if any, were actually offered to the local people, even menial ones. Furthermore, the influx of non-Baloch workers continues unabated as, according to the quota system, most of the available jobs go to other provinces. This is in part due to the fact that the Baloch are underrepresented politically, on both a provincial and national level, and also in part due to their weak representation within the civil service and armed forces. The problem is exacerbated even further by the fact that those non-Baloch living in Balochistan fall under the Balochistan provincial quota diluting the ethnic Baloch representation even more.Unsurprisingly, as the port’s economic importance has increased, many outside businesses seek to relocate and expand to the area. In recent years there has been a huge influx of large-scale Karachi-based fishing concerns moving operations to Gwadar. This in turn has had the effect of driving local fishermen out thereby depriving them of their livelihood. To date the government has failed to address this issue and offers no compensation or means of redress to the local people.Additionally, land surrounding Gwadar port has been purchased by the government at discounted prices and then distributed to non-Baloch civilian and military personnel, often in prime locations. As a result, the local population are being slowly pushed out from their homes, their lands and ultimately their livelihoods as the port continues to grow. This tragedy has only served to alienate and isolate the ethnic Baloch even further as they are gradually becoming a sidelined underclass minority in their own land.Clearly investment at the port has been great but it has been acutely focused and set aside for the specific aims of the project with no concern for the local population, as has been the case throughout Balochistan. Everyday amenities and services are still lacking and the situation shows no sign of improvement. Even the mayor of Gwadar, Nazim, was quoted as saying:“Gwadar is supposed to be a city for the twenty-first century, but every day local people are crying about water and basic health facilities like drinking water, electricity, gas, hospitals and schools”. “If the government can build a port, why can’t they build a new school?”Following on from his announcement of the Deep-Sea-Port Project, General Musharraf also handed over one of the world’s biggest copper-gold projects at Saindak to the Chinese. The net result seen a distribution of wealth as follows: 2% of the profits going to the local Baloch population, 50% going to the Chinese and 48% to the federal government. Hardly a fair deal.Furthermore, during his visit to China in 2006, General Musharraf also announced a massive redevelopment of the Karakoram Highway. Once again he promised substantial benefits to all parties as it would be the shortest route to the sea for products manufactured in China and provide an overland route between China and India thereby linking those two huge markets. Unsurprisingly, no benefits have been forthcoming for the Baloch people as a result of this project to date.As a result of his failure to deliver on any of his promises, the policies of General Musharraf with respect to Balochistan, have done nothing but agitate and anger the Baloch people causing great political and civil unrest. This culminated in the brutal murder of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti in 2006 and the following murder of Nawabzada Balach Khan Marri in 2007 along with the slaughter of thousands of innocent people. Unfortunately, the unrest in Balochistan still continues.It must be stated that since the time of General Zia-ul-Haq each successive government has made many promises to the Baloch people with regards to improving their socio-economic situation and pledging to help lift them up from the brink of starvation and poverty. However, none of them have honoured their promises. Instead it is clear that the statement of Dr Hayee Baloch still holds true:“It is apparent that Islamabad is intent on treating Balochistan as a mere colony….”The Peoples Party of Pakistan (PPP) regime of President Asif Zardari even went as far as transferring control of the Gwadar Port to the China Overseas Port Holding Company (COPHC), thus continuing the same game of promising much and delivering nothing as their predecessors had done.Unfortunately the Baloch, once again, are expecting much from the newly elected democratic government, but Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif is playing the same game already played by the former dictators and politicians. During his recent visit to China in 2013, the Prime Minister signed several agreements with China with reference to railways, roads, natural resources and the Gwadar Port without consulting the Baloch people at any stage. Naturally the Baloch nationalists are once again very concerned about the motives of the current Prime Minister. No doubt, any miscalculation about Baloch grievances will only add further fuel to the fire in the conflict between the federal government of Mian Sahib and the Baloch nation.The reality is, of course, that these roads, railways and ports will be of little to no benefit to Balochistan. Simply put, these railways and road links, along with the port of Gwadar are there just to serve the interests of the colonial power in order to facilitate colonisation, military deployments and the acceleration of the economic exploitation of Balochistan.Unlike other similar-sized projects throughout the world there has been no reinvestment in the surrounding areas of Gwadar, nor has there been any consideration for the local people. The Chinese have not spent a single penny on any human resource developments like education, health and infrastructure in the concerned districts of Chaghi, Gwadar or anywhere else in Balochistan despite making huge profits from the region. Even more telling is that neither has the federal government in many cases.  In stark contrast to the huge profits being made and plundered is the fact that even today the most basic facilities like clean drinking water, hospitals, schools electricity and gas remain unavailable to 95% of Balochistan.The question then arises “What does the future hold for Balochistan and the port of Gwadar?”Clearly the Baloch people have benefitted little from this mega-project and continue to be side-lined and ignored at every turn. Injustice is clear for all to see. Surely the present government must recognise this and address the issue with urgency. Failure to do so will only serve to heighten the tension and frustration felt by the Baloch people even further.Mian Sahib, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, must realise that we, the Baloch, must be treated as rightful owners of all of our resources be they found by land or sea. Projects and plans which are in contradiction to our interests can no longer be accepted or tolerated. This situation is indeed comparable to the bloody resistance at Gwadar against the Portuguese led by Mir Hamal Khan Hoat Kalmati Baloch in the 15th century and today’s situation is rapidly approaching boiling point. Violence, armed resistance, bullets and bombs are never the answer and despite everything, peace and reconciliation are still possible, but only if the continued practice of exploitation comes to an end.We, the Baloches, are the masters of Balochistan. The land of Balochistan is the land of our ancestors. It is a widespread opinion that the Baloch people are the legal owners of every inch of land and all of the natural resources within Balochistan. Enough is enough; we the Baloches are now fed up with the same game, different faces.“Kohing a Koheen Kalat;Kase Pit-e-Mirras Na-ant;Ma Pa Sagan ra Giptagant”Translation:“O thee mountain-fort of Kalat;Thou are not heritage to anyone;We have captured thee by the sword”.Mir Abdullah Khan, the Khan of Kalat 1714—1734
“He Sent Home His Shirt Buttons to Tell Us He Was Alive” Her face covered with a shawl, feet swollen, eyes dried, holding a picture of her brother tightly in her hands, Farzana Majeed is slowly and painfully covering the 450 mile distance from Quetta to Karachi on foot for the past nine days. In reality, this painful journey for Farzana began four years ago, when her family received a call at their home informing that her brother had been “picked up” on his way from Mastung. Having attended funerals of hundreds of tortured and mutilated young men, who had been disappeared under similar circumstances and later dumped in various corners of Balochistan, Farzana knew very well that her brother may meet the same fate.Farzana’s brother, Zakir Majeed, was a student of English literature at the Balochistan University. With excellent leadership and communication skills and a heightened sense of awareness for the rights of the people of Balochistan, Zakir was intensely involved in campus activism. Zakir had no record of violence against his name and his means of protest were strictly peaceful in nature.Farzana herself is a graduate of biochemistry and was until recently enrolled in a Master of Philosophy program at the Balochistan University. Her educational achievements are a rare feat for a woman from Balochistan, where the rate of transition to tertiary education is one of the lowest in the world. But ever since her brother’s disappearance, Farzana’s own life has come to a grinding halt; attending classes at the university is now an indulgence she simply cannot afford.She moves from one city to another setting up protest camps outside various press clubs, attending court hearings and organising rallies in collaboration with the families of hundreds of other young Baloch men who have disappeared. In search of her brother, Farzana has knocked on all the doors. Each time she hears about a tortured and abandoned body found somewhere in Karachi or Balochistan, she rushes to the morgue, praying for it not to be her brother. With each passing day Farzana’s hope for the recovery of her brother is fading away. In an interview given a few months ago, she said.She says she does not know how to comfort her old mother or how to give her hope that one day Zakir will return home alive and not as a disfigured corpse.Farzana’s story and the plight of hundreds of other Baloch families’ are not sensational or significant enough to warrant much attention, neither from the West nor from the people of Pakistan. When 15-year-old Malala Yousufzai was shot, there was an international outcry against the ruthless attack. United Nation’s Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon and the US President both released statements condemning the cowardly attack by the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan. Malala soon became a powerful symbol for girls’ education across the globe; her battle to secure a right to education for the girls in Swat Valley was aptly raised and praised on the global stage. The perpetrators in her case were the Taliban; a clear-enough enemy. No diplomatic ties were at risk of being sabotaged by condemning the Taliban and certainly no ally lifelines were at peril of being severed. The support for Malala was not going to affect Pakistan’s war on terror; if anything, it would further legitimise it.Nabila Rehman, the young girl whose grandmother was killed in a drone strike, is currently in Washington DC to record her testimony in front of the US Congress. She is in Washington DC to share her story, and those of other innocent victims, with US lawmakers, the American public and the rest of the world. Nabila is getting an international stage to record her protest and has given hours of recorded interviews to the US and international media. Citizens across Pakistan are not happy; they think Nabila deserves as much, if not more, attention than Malala. They are also upset about the embarrassingly low turn-out of lawmakers (just five senators) at the congressional hearing where Nabila was testifying. People across Pakistan are lobbying online for greater awareness and attention for Nabila’s plight and that of other drone victims.So, while Malala enjoys support in the West for her cause, Nabila has managed to secure an overwhelming amount of support from the people of Pakistan, Farzana, the sister in quest for her missing brother, remains as lonesome as ever. And yet, she marches on.For most international powers, talking about Balochistan and the human rights abuses occurring there, adds to the complexity of dealing with Pakistan. With most western powers already in a dysfunctional relationship with a rapidly spiraling Pakistan, raising or discussing the Baloch cause is seen as not worth the headache nor does it, in the short run, directly affect their own national security interests.For the international media, Balochistan is strictly a ‘no-go’ area, not only because it is widely-considered unsafe for outsiders but also because journalists and camera crews are said to be immediately denied clearance by the intelligence authorities. Pakistan’s own local media is perhaps under strict directions to limit or altogether exclude stories from Balochistan.For the people at large, it is more comforting and makes more sense to believe that the sovereignty of a people can only be violated by external forces. No rallies are held in Karachi, Lahore or Islamabad, like they have been held in the past for drone attack victims. Nor will they ever question the fact that if Nabila can fly to Washington DC to ask the US Congress, ‘why did you kill my grandmother?’ Why can Farzana not ask the same question on the floor of Pakistan’s own parliament? Does Farzana not have the right to ask Pakistani lawmakers, ‘where is my brother?’Farzana Majeed’s brother, and all those missing Baloch men and women, are unfortunately not the victims of drone strikes nor are they victims of the Taliban’s savagery. They are, instead, victims at the hands of a known yet unknown enemy for raising their voice against injustice and demanding their basic rights.Farzana will continue walking; she knows when she will reach Karachi, there will be no politicians or public crowds waiting to receive her or express their solidarity. The United Nations and key international powers will not condemn the disappearance of her brother, let alone the government or people of Pakistan. She is left to fight this battle alone. A battle she is not willing to give up on until her brother returns home; hopefully alive. 
 Government Pledges Assistance to Farmers. QUETTA: The current government is fully cognizant about the role of agriculture in bolstering the provincial economy and damages to the sector due to power crisis.These views were expressed by Chief Minister Balochistan Dr Abdul Malik Baloch while talking to a delegation of Zamindar Action Committee, here on Wednesday.The delegation apprised Chief Minister Balochistan of the difficulties faced by farmers in agri sector, including load-shedding, heavy bills and import of apple from Iran.Chief Minister told the delegation that government was seriously focusing on the power crisis in the province therefore government was striving hard to get completed work on transmission lines at the earliest.He said that government was making efforts day and night and conducting meetings with WAPDA and NTDC authorities for the early completion of the work on Dadu -Khuzdar and Dera Ghazai Kha- Loralai transmission lines.Chief Minister told the delegation that the work on transmission projects would be completed by April and June next year, adding that the government was also working to get electricity from the Iran.He also stressed upon the proper utilization of water in agri- sector and increasing the production of wheat and other crops that help strengthen the economy of the province.He told the delegation that the government had hired the services of country’s prominent economist Qasir Bangali and asked the members of delegation to contact him and discuss their recommendations.Chief Minister assured the delegation the government would utilize all available resources to provide basic facilities to farmers and growers. He said that government would hold donors conference in which issues of agriculture would also be discussed.
 Pakistan: Marchers Aim to Raise Awareness of Baloch Disappearances. Farzana Majeed holds Pakistani media as responsible for the disappearances of thousands of Baloch nationalists as the state security apparatus, labelling it a “very willing accomplice.”29-year old Majeed is among the two dozen people on a long march organised by the Voice of Missing Baloch Persons (VOMBP) which has protesting for the last four years. They are demanding the return of their loved ones, who they allege have been illegally apprehended and detained by Pakistan’s intelligence and security agencies.“The media should be the voice of the victims and report on the atrocities committed on our people; instead they are pressured into silence by the state”, she said.The march began on October 27 from Quetta in Balochistan covering a distance of almost 700 km, and will reach Karachi, in the Sindh province, by the end of the week. There, outside the Karachi Press Club, they will hold an indefinite sit-in and hunger strike. The marchers started with covering anywhere between 35 to 40 km/day, but blisters and illness are slowing down progress to barely 25km a day.The mineral-rich Balochistan is the largest of the four provinces of Pakistan, and was an independent state until 1947, when Pakistan annexed its eastern side and Iran its western side. For many Baloch families, since the disappearances began more than a decade back, life has not been the same.According to Qadeer Baloch who founded the VOMBP, around 18,000 Baloch nationalists, including doctors, professors, politicians and students, have been abducted since 2001. “We have received mutilated corpses of 1,500 of them.”Farzana Majeed’s brother Zakri was abducted four years ago from the city of Mastung. He was the vice president of the Baloch Students Organisation (Azad), a nationalist student group raising awareness of the rights of the Baloch on campuses. Despite holding a double master’s in biochemistry and Balochi language, Majeed said her life has been put on “on hold” and her three siblings and mother rendered “homeless” since Zakri’s disappearance. She hasn’t heard any news of him for three years.Baloch’s own son Jalil Reiki, the information secretary of Baloch Republican Party, was picked up in 2009. Almost two years and eight months later, his tortured and bullet-riddled body was found.“The disappearances started way back in 2001 during president Pervez Musharraf’s rule but this human rights abuse came on public radar in 2004-05 after the women — mothers, sisters and wives — started coming out and began protesting,” explained Malik Siraj Akbar, editor of online English newspaper The Baloch Hal. He said Baloch women hardly ever come out publicly and so when they did, they were bound to be noticed.“Except for BBC, and a couple of English national dailies, no other media is supporting us,” said Baloch, who is leading the march. The lukewarm response, however, has failed to deter the marchers. “It is a way of teaching our coming generation the value of speaking up,” Baloch told Pakistan’s Dawn newspaper.“Some of our friends in the media have disclosed that the intelligence agencies have warned and threatened them from covering our peaceful protest; others have been told that we are causing bad publicity internationally,” he added.Akbar, who has taken asylum in the United States after most of his friends and colleagues were killed, said: “I know the agencies have been threatening the protesters with dire consequences and forcing them to shut down their camps and end the rally.” However, he added that he was not aware of any “threats or pressure on the media from the agencies and the government”.But according to the chairperson of the independent Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, Zohra Yusuf, “journalists in Balochistan are under pressure from the Frontier Corps [federal reserve military force], the Baloch separatists as well as the religious extremists”.Mazhar Abbas, a former secretary general of the Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists, speculated that the poor coverage of the march, as well as the issue of disappearances, may be due to the “influence used on media barons by the intelligence agencies”.While he emphasised the electronic media had covered the Supreme Court hearings around the issue at length, he found it had never been tackled properly from a human rights angle. He lamented the “non-professional” attitude of the print media which did not find the issue grave enough to do investigative reporting on it.The missing are no longer an “exciting” story so they are not covered by the national media, Akbar said. ”Unfortunately, nobody seems to care much about it in a country where dozens of people are killed every day,” he said.Zohra Yusuf also said the urban-based media did not seem particularly interested in the issue as it was more “ratings oriented”.As for the on-going march not able to attract media’s attention, Abbas suggested that had it been led by “known political or nationalist figures”, it would have automatically lured the media to it.A recent HRCP report, based on a fact-finding mission to Balochistan, stated that while the people of the province have pinned their hopes on the new government to address the problems, especially regarding the “grave human rights violations”, many do not see any visible policy change “within the security and intelligence agencies”, as the “kill-and-dump policy” continued.According to Malik Siraj Akbar, while the ongoing long march isn’t any different from past demonstration, it is the “first major protest” since the new governments in the province and the centre took over the reins.“The long march reflects the new government’s failure to resurface the missing persons and normalise the situation in Balochistan,” he pointed out.
 Court Rejects Musharraf’s Plea in Bugti Murder Case. QUETTA, Nov 26: The Anti-Terrorism Court, Quetta, on Tuesday rejected an application seeking exemption of former president Pervez Musharraf from appearing before the court in the Bugti murder case.The court ordered that a letter be written to registrar of the Supreme Court to forward the original bail bond of guarantor of former military ruler retired Gen Pervez Musharraf to the trial court.ATC judge Tariq Anwar Kasi during hearing of the case asked police officials why former prime minister Shaukat Aziz, former governor Owais Ghani and former district coordination officer Dera Bugti Samad Lasi were not present in the court.The prosecution submitted that the three accused were absconding and because of this their statements could not be recorded.The court directed officials concerned to advertise names of the three absconders in newspapers and confiscate their properties.Former federal minister Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao and leader of Qaumi Watan Party were present, but former home minister Mir Shoaib Nausherwani did not appear because of his poor health.
 Between the Earthquakes and the War .The sound of silence is scarier than the sounds of bombs and bullets.Sumera sat hidden under the rickety top of her makeshift date palm hut, unsure if she should stick her head out to see what was happening, or continue to live under the illusion that she was safe as long as she could not see the sky. The sounds of her usual morning routine–clay dirt crunching under her sandals, twigs crackling in the fire under a pan, her knuckles beating a lump of dough–had been replaced by the rotors on an army helicopter flying above her, and the gunshots she could not place. The 30 minutes of silence that followed was a confusing medley of men strapped with guns atop motorbikes, racing into the mountains to escape those in uniform; her mother and sisters muttering prayers on their rosaries, hoping to ward off a raid; and the rising intonations at the end of every sentence spoken–people asking questions, but getting no answers.The explosion that followed made her heart sink, but now she knew a little more than she did before. It was probably a mortar shell, she later told me, thrown either by the Pakistan Army or the Balochistan Liberation Front (BLF), the separatist militants who had a hold on the area. And, since the bomb seemed to come from the direction of the medical camp that was being run by two separatist political groups–the Balochistan National Movement (BNM) and the Balochistan Student Organisation-Azad (BSO-Azad)–the militants and the military were most likely battling each other out for control of relief distribution in her rubble of a home in Awaran district’s Mashkay village.Battles between the security forces and the militants had been going on since the earthquakes hit at the end of September. But this was not going to be one of those short exchanges. This time, said Sumera, it sounded like the army was hell-bent on winning and sticking around.***It is difficult to shake the feeling that areas like Mashkay and Gajjar are part of some other country. The market that runs through the middle of Mashkay is plastered with wall-chalking announcing the death of Pakistan, and the establishment of an independent Balochistan. One drawing showcases a hand grenade, with “Pakistan Murdabad” etched across the bottom. Another one lists the names of militant groups fighting for the separation of Balochistan. Spend an evening with a relatively well-off Baloch family that has a television set, and it is difficult to see Hamid Mir as anything other than a disconnected commentator regurgitating the same high political names in a far off place called Islamabad. The Ufone commercials that intersperse his show seem doubly distanced, as they sell dreams of laissez-faire burger existences, where young boys want nothing more than a new smartphone.At the end of September, Mashkay was part of a large number of settlements in Balochistan’s southern Awaran and Kech districts, hit by a series of earthquakes. The federal government says that 386 people died in the disaster. In an independent report based on field research by 11 non-government organizations (NGOs) in 296 villages, and issued by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA), Awaran and Kech districts are classified as being in “crisis or highly food insecure” areas. According to measurement standards used by the UN agency, the affected areas are now in an “emergency” situation, and need immediate humanitarian assistance. The UN, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Medecins Sans Frontieres/Doctors Without Borders (MSF) have been requesting the Pakistan government to allow them access to the earthquake-hit areas, after Balochistan Chief Minister Dr Abdul Malik, and local separatists, had asked them to come assist with relief and rehabilitation. But the federal agency tasked with coordinating relief, the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), insists that it has the capacity to deal with the situation itself and needs no help from international aid agencies. Instead, the NDMA has involved the army in delivering and distributing aid – a decision that the BLF will fight tooth and nail.***About a 30 minute walk from Sumera’s home, Mukhtar Ahmed, a Karachi-based ambulance driver for Edhi Foundation, woke up confused and dazed to the sound of gunshots. He had barely gotten up when 25 army soldiers stormed the medical camp that he was sleeping at in central Mashkay. The armed Baloch next to him (“most likely a BLF fighter,” Ahmed later told me) immediately jumped out, to make an escape, but Ahmed was too scared to follow him. Being an Urdu-speaker from Karachi, he had no friends or family who would hide him in this far-flung Baloch village. “Better to stay put,” he thought–a decision he quickly came to regret.The soldiers he thought would be safer to stay with grabbed him and started to beat him. One kicked him on his feet and the other on his back, before they started yelling at him and asking him who he was. Trembling, he explained that he was a poor, working man, doing his job for Edhi Foundation. When they asked him why the other man had run away, he felt it was best not to tell them that the man was armed–it might just get him into trouble. “Let me go,” he begged instead, more afraid than he had ever been before. At that very moment, he thought of his daughter, who had asked him to quit his job when she heard that his employer was sending him to Balochistan. “It’s not safe,” she had said, “and not worth the 8000 rupees you earn every month.” He told her that he liked the flexibility and the freedom of his job, but suddenly found himself regretting his decision. “I thought I was going to die there. I have never been so convinced that I was facing the end of my life,” he told me later. “Not even in Karachi, when Edhi sent me to bring patients home from those horrible gun fights between city gangs.”Ahmed had come to work for the victims of the earthquake and had run into an army operation. In a twist of fate, he had a momentary taste of Sumera’s life, or the everyday life of a village existing between earthquakes and a war: Constantly afraid of quakes from below and bombs from above.Luckily for him, the soldiers realized that the man they were hitting looked suspiciously non-Baloch, speaking fluent Urdu with no hint of the local Balochi accent. They set Ahmed free and a soldier sat next to him to calm him down. “He was a nice man, and he told me that the Frontier Corps (FC) boys were far more jumpy than the army. He apologized and gave me some food. I had to eat, he said. That was very nice of him.”In the hours that followed, Ahmed witnessed more than he could have ever imagined. The army rounded up 400-500 men and marched them into the medical camp. There, an army representative, “most likely a colonel”, held a short speech, announcing that the army had entered Mashkay and had “plans to stay for the next five years”. The residents, he announced, “had nothing to fear.” The army would save them from the militants, especially if they could help the security forces by pointing out the members of militant groups. Ahmed noticed that everyone stayed quiet. They seemed as scared as him, of reprisal attacks from the militants who would accuse them of snitching. And a deeply unpopular army, that had beat him up, and was known for harassing locals everyday–sometimes, even kidnapping and killing them.As the speech ended, the army representative told everyone that they had brought aid. “No one was allowed to leave without a package,” said Ahmed. “And then the army put up a sign, renaming the camp: Army Relief Camp.”The BLF did not take kindly to the sudden appearance of security forces. It had been defending the medical camp from earlier army offensives to ensure that relief remained under the control of the BNM and the BSO-Azad. While the hauled up men were still in the camp, the BLF launched a counter-attack. Ahmed and the rest of the men were told to jump to the ground, and to lie flat, so that the exchange of bullets did not hit them.Nobody got hurt, but Ahmed was getting desperate; he wanted to go home. He called out a soldier and insisted that he needed to leave. There was a lady doctor waiting for him, he explained, and he had promised to take her back to Karachi. A Baloch sitting next to him overheard. When the soldiers were out of earshot, he leaned over and whispered, “Do you mean the lady journalist making the rounds?” Ahmed quietly nodded. “Yes, it is better that you tell them that she is a doctor. They might not like that she is here, seeing all of this.”A few days after reports of the army forcing its way into Mashkay-Gajjar broke, Major General Asim Saleem Bajwa, director general of the Inter-Service Public Relations (ISPR), sent out a press release denying that any such action had taken place. “[S]ecurity forces are in Awaran and Mushke, only for relief operation, [d]ispelling a misperception which has been created by some media reports,” said a press release issued by his office. “There is no Military Operation in Awaran and Mushke as being propagated by miscreants.” He also appealed to the general public to “beware of miscreant’s propaganda.”Major General Muhammad Saeed Aleem, the middle-aged chairman of the NDMA, agrees. “I cannot speak on behalf of the ISPR, but let me first ask you: When the army is attacked, what is it supposed to do except for retaliate?” When I ask him what the army is doing there in the first place, he explains: “The army is distributing relief because it is the only institution in our country that has the capacity to do so. We have not asked international organizations to enter earthquake-hit areas because we have the capacity to handle this work ourselves.”The only problem, it seems, is that many people do not want to take aid from the army.Five-year-old Bakhtiar did not know how to speak Urdu but when he saw me standing outside of his aunt Sumera’s hut trying to capture some photos and sounds of the helicopters and explosions, he knew what to do. “Baji,” said the little boy. He stretched out his arm to grab hold of my hand and I let him lead me into the hut. Then he let go and muttered words he knew I would understand: “Jahaaz. FC. Firing.”Mashkay subdivision is surrounded by 12 FC checkpoints that control the entry and exit on every main road connected to the villages within. Most locals, including Bakhtiar and his family, have figured out a way to avoid the soldiers, by cutting through surrounding forests on their motorbikes or by foot. They would do anything, they told me, to avoid getting stuck with an FC soldier, asking them to bring a glass of water or fruit from a nearby market. If villagers help soldiers, they are seen as traitors to the Baloch cause and local militants have been known to confront traitors with questions, and punishments. Sometimes the confrontation is nothing more than a heated verbal exchange. Other times, the militants might find creative ways to punish helpers. One man had his car blown up.The battles between the FC and the Baloch separatists have been going on for several years. The area is a stronghold of this middle-class section of the Baloch uprising, and many BLF and BNM members have been born and raised in Mashkay. Their families and friends support them and hide them, giving them beds to sleep in as they shuttle from one place to another. Dr Allah Nazar, the BLF commander, and Dr Abdul Mannan, the general secretary of the BNM, were both born and raised in Mashkay, and followed each other to Bolan Medical College in Quetta.Manan admitted that the militants were ready to mete out punishments to those who threatened their existence. “We have a choice between the movement and those who threaten us. We believe in this movement so we choose to punish, or kill, those who threaten the survival of our politics,” he said, before telling me that the BLF had killed two of his cousins. They were part of a death squad, and they would regularly target separatists. “The movement had no choice.” Death, he said, is not the only punishment available. “We have made a man walk barefoot for seven days–that is a pretty effective way of teaching him a lesson,” said the doctor.The FC knows that the leaders of the Baloch rebellion hide in Mashkay-Gajjar. That is why they launched a major operation in December last year in nearby Mai village, Dr Allah Nazar’s birthplace and family home. His sister, Mahnaz, told me how hundreds of soldiers came on their jeeps and their helicopters, bombing her brother’s empty home, stripping men in her family naked, and masking them before taking them away. Soldiers were not soft on the women, either. When Mahnaz and other women in the village first heard the gunshots and the bombs in the morning, they ran to a nearby mosque to hide. When the soldiers entered the mosque, said Mahnaz, they stripped the women of their veils and snatched the Quran from their hands. “They yelled in our faces and told us we were Hindu spies here to break up the country,” said Mahnaz. “My mother never recovered from the incident. She is not quite right in her head anymore.” The operation cleared the way for the checkpoints that now surround Mashky.The story of the last year’s Mashky operation seems tame compared to the widespread stories of torture and abuse that circulate among the Baloch. Twenty eight-year old Kamal, a member of the BSO-Azad, told me of the time when he was picked up from Quetta. At the time, he was a sociology student at Balochistan University. “The security forces kept me in custody for two months–and they did not waste a moment to torture me,” he says. He told me how they would shuttle him between two torture rooms, one pitch black–dedicated to “mental torture”, where they would give him blankets smelling of “urine and feces”–and the other decorated with a spiral pattern on the ceiling, walls, and floor–meant for “physical torture”. They wanted to make him dizzy, he said, before hanging him upside down, naked, and electrocuting his stomach. That was not as bad as what they would do at the end. “The unspeakable. The inhumane. Something I cannot tell you, because you are a woman, and that would be inappropriate,” he said. I never found out what happened to him, but a man in Mai gave me a hint when he told me why a friend of his had lost his mind.“They would smear a pole with oil and spices, before they stuck it up his behind.”***Once back in Karachi, Ahmed did not want to go to Balochistan again; he was scared of what might happen to him there. The Edhi Foundation still continues to send its ambulances to the quake-hit areas. “The area is under the control of the army now. They are letting us through,” says Anwar Qazmi, a coordinator for Edhi Foundation in Karachi.Sumera sent me a text message a few days after the operation, and told me that many have left. “Baji, the army has control of the whole area, and most people have escaped and run into the mountains,” she said in the message. “They are carrying out raids, and harassing us in our homes.” She wanted to tell me earlier, but the phones have been off. “Everything just goes silent here,” she wrote. She still does not know if the Zong Tower had failed, or if the army had jammed the networks.The quiet between the battles are not as strange as the silence that surrounds Mashkay-Gajjar–in the news media and in the parliament. It is difficult to call the silence anything other than a blackout, and it is a challenge to get to the truth behind it. Everyone has an agenda in Balochistan, a preference for how the facts should be portrayed. Perhaps, the closest thing to the facts is etched in the bones of those who live in Balochistan.Little Bakhtiar had the clearest answers when I asked him, before I left, who he was afraid of.“FC!”Why Bakhti?“Because they hit us…”With what?“With their guns.”
 Why Liberals Failed to Defend Malala. During last year’s SAFMA [South Asian Free Media Association] conference, Imtiaz Alam, the organization’s secretary general, grumbled with the chief guest, the then president Asif Ali Zardari, about the government’s inaction against the Pakistani Taliban. Mr. Alam went on to warn the president that if Islamabad did not quash the Taliban, the people of Pakistan would cajole the United Nations to intervene in order to rescue the country from the cruelty of the Taliban.Zardari patiently listened to Mr. Alam’s complaint and also his naïve warning. But what the former president said in response merited significant attention.  Zardari talked about the shortcomings within Pakistan’s liberal class. He explained how the right-wing was capable of bringing out tens of thousands of people on a short notice to rally for the causes they believe in.The former president taunted the liberal class for its lukewarm response to the assassination of former Punjab governor Salmaan Taseer and its aftermath. Some people even did not show up for Taseer’s funeral, Zardari recalled, because they feared being targeted by fanatics like Mumtaz Qadri merely for attending the burial of a man who had unjustly been accused of blasphemy and murdered in broad daylight.Taseer’s murder sharply polarized the public opinion in Pakistan but it also provided the liberals an opportunity to stand up and vociferously denounce extremism. They missed that opportunity simply because it literally took them weeks to realize what they had actually witnessed under their nose: Pakistan had just entered a distressing epoch of extremism that had permeated even among the country’s clean-shaven, English-speaking professional lawyers and social media users.I am immediately reminded of Zardari’s observations about the right-wing’s maneuvering capabilities and tactics when I follow their fresh diatribe against teenage activist Malala Yousafzai in the wake of the release of her autobiography I Am Malala. Deplorably, some private schools have already banned the book at their libraries because, according to one spokesman of the schools’ association, they do not want other girls to emulate Malala. The conservatives have convinced themselves that Malala is speaking the language of western countries without realizing that one does not have to be a “western-agent” to advocate girls’ right to education.It is already known how the religious class manipulates public sentiments by distorting facts and putting otherwise clearly stated things out of context. What has, nonetheless, flabbergasted me is the enormous resources available to the right-wing and the endless opportunities offered to them to appear on the television to champion unholy causes, including the call for violence.Space for free speech and preaching of liberal views has drastically shrunk in Pakistan in recent years. While seeing courageous people like Dr. Pervez Hoodbhoy or Farzana Bari confront conservative commentators like Orya Maqbool Jan or Ansar Abbasi one does not know whether to accolade their courage or worry about their personal safety.Sometimes when I see them speak on television, I still feel these liberal thinkers are not being fully truthful. But then I also immediately remind myself that nobody wants to end up as the next Taseer.Amid the fresh controversy surrounding I Am Malala, one must concede the failure of the liberal intellectuals to adequately defend the book in television talk shows. This is either because of the fear for personal safety or the panelists’ ignorance about the overall context of the book.At least, two liberal analysts, who had been invited on television to defend I Am Malala, embarrassingly admitted that they had not even read the book. On the other hand, the conservatives appeared well-prepared: They had highlighted portions of the book and brought notes with them only to misrepresent and mislead the audience but, honestly, they still looked better than the unprepared liberals.Genuine challenges aside, the Left in Pakistan seems to be in a complete disarray and unprepared to fight back. Actually, the Left faces a fatal disconnect between theory and practice.Clearly, I Am Malala has not only put Pakistan’s right-wing into a limbo but it has also pushed the urban liberal thinkers out of their comfort zone. They do support Malala’s cause for education but still fail to fully understand what it means to be a Pashtun girl and flaunt about her ethnic identity and culture while snubbing the Pakistani etiquettes officially imposed upon us in our textbooks.At times, even liberal thinkers surrender before the official narrative. While Dr. Pervez Hoodbhoy said in a talk-show that he’d rather ban The Satanic Verses in Pakistan, Farzana Bari, in another show, said she ‘personally’ believed the Ahmedyas were ‘Kafirs’.These are some critical issues on which the liberal class should speak rationally rather than being overwhelmed by their emotions while making judgments.Historically, the liberal class in Pakistan has predominantly been represented by western educated urban elite living in big cities like Islamabad, Lahore and Karachi. They were either born in rich families where they inherited liberal life style by birth or they, otherwise, believed liberalism was good in theory because it helped to enliven drawing room discussions.The urban liberals may have heard of the hardships of people like Malala in rural Pakistan but they did not personally experience her struggle. Hence, even many liberals cannot fully explain what it means to be Ziauddin, Malala’s father whose biggest dream in life was to open a school and raise an educated daughter. In large cities, the Left and the Right lampoon Ziauddin’s struggle because they take a girl’s access to education for granted.Within Pakistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan are such places where liberal theory translates into practice.  If Qadeer Baloch’s long march from Quetta to Karachi is not a practical manifestation of a struggle for liberal values then what else is?The Left and the Right in Urban Pakistan prefers to identify themselves as Pakistanis. They have little exposure to identity politics because the state of Pakistan has systematically crushed or discouraged ethnic identities. Hence, I can imagine why even a liberal from urban Pakistan would be bewildered when Malala identifies herself as a Swati and a Pashtun first before calling herself a Pakistani. Why should one be surprised? Didn’t we notice the semi-literate Baloch housewife from Awaran when she told a B.B.C. reporter, “this is Balochistan, not Pakistan.”I Am Malala is an educating account for Pakistan’s clergy but it also offers food for thought to the urban liberals to understand how old nations like the Baloch and the Pashtun view the world and how they wish to be identified. Liberals cannot defend Malala and people like her unless they experience her hardships and the context of struggle. Her book introduces the readers beyond the traditional textbook narratives although it also highlights the dilemma of a young girl trapped under multiple identities at the same time.Some accuse Malala’s father of putting words in her mouth. As a matter of fact, it is totally the other way round. Our textbooks had put one narrative in our mouth for six decades and I Am Malala introduces us to one part of our history and the forgotten heroes that the official narrative intentionally excluded. Personally, I would prefer to learn more about a Pashtun worrier and a Sindhi poet rather than learning about an alien Arab invader because I can hardly relate to the Arab culture.I Am Malala did make a sincere effort to educate a country suffering from an identity crisis.  A sixteen-year old girl can only provide us food for thought. It is now for the liberal intellectuals to initiate an in-depth debate on issues that plague the Pakistani society. By not sufficiently countering the right-wing distortions, the liberals have, unfortunately, let the book and its authors down.
 Corruption: Eating Away From Inside Out. Corruptions which can also be identified as the most exclusive matter for the present news broadcasts, categorically owns intense significance. This term is specifically applied to self-benefiting conduct by public officials and others dedicated to public service or those who possess power.According to a famous Turkish proverb, “Fish starts rotting from head”, exactly in the comparable way the roots of corruption start mounting from the top of the society. Rotting process begins from top but spreads all over till it reaches to the roots; similarly corruption commences from the top but doesn’t stagger moving to the lower ranked officers. That’s how this horrifying ulcer reaches to our society. This terrible ulcer tares each institution, organization, association or system apart! It eats way our society from inside out!It is equivalent to a virus which wipes away the white blood cells of a human body and makes it indefensible against minor infections. Corruption makes a state consequently unstable. The economic or financial status of a country gets a hold of severe collapse. After that the state has be depolarized or dependent of international aid and get the burdens of international banks’ loan which amplify each year. On the other hand, the country’s image through out the world gets a rigorous collision. It loses the trust, the diplomatic policies, the political standards and interactions with allies. It won’t take long for that country to be named as a failed state.There is not merely one specific country in the entire world which had been victimized by the dreadful virus of corruption unfortunately there are several. Some have been inadequately destroyed by corruption while several are just in the journey of devastation. Taking a glimpse at the state where we live can be the best matter to be considered curiously, since we belong to this state today anyhow. Being a democratic country, the government had got three institutions widely known as executive, legislature and judiciary, but a corrupt system which has failed to maintain the peace, justice and social security of the nation, might not possess any right to keep any other authority. As far as parliament is concerned, the members have disregarded legislation which their main duty is, but they have been very busy with elections, vote of no confidence and blaming each other.The most interesting fact might be about our political leaders, from minister to a minor chairman, all might even don’t know how to count the amount they either keep in the pockets or in the international banks these days. Robberies, larceny and thefts are specially done after getting permitted by the police. As most of them are the grubbers of money but who cares about the law and the increasing crime in the country. Courts were already sold but now the trade of justice is really common. Along with this, the pilgrims have to pay additional money for Hajj in Islamic Democratic Countries every year. We can assume, how distasteful it just sounds. Every one seems to be engaged in filling up pockets before the governance ends, but in between the deprived populace have always had to tolerate each new government, they elected through out the history of the six decades.Commencing from 1948, this country entered an era during which corruption dominated the political scene and domestic conditions deteriorated. In collier’s year book, a Philippine proverb defines the prospect clearly, “Nothing destroys iron like its own rust”. Similarly, the responsible groups are not any outsiders, but they are the natives of this country who possess power or who once possessed authority. In the flash back we might find several politicians who were accused of corruption. Like wise; during Ayub Khan’s government, 1,660 civil servants were either arrested or retired in charges of corruption. Along with that in May 1988, Zia ul Haq dismissed the Prime Minister Mohammed Khan Junejo, the whole cabinet and dissolved the National Assembly along with all provincial assemblies. But corruption had grown roots all around and it was complicated to end such a terrible social ulcer. So, as a result corruption kept on deteriorating the system.In June 1996, during the Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto’s government, the country had to struggle with severe financial crisis following the collapse of economy. Political as well as economic crisis continued during Prime Minister Nawaz Shareef’s government. Along with numerous corruption charges, finally after the atomic experiments, international aids halted. Pakistan lost its status as a member of the Common Wealth Countries. Once more the country had to suffer serious financial crash. The crisis continued till the dictator government favored America after 9/11 in 2001. Astrictions over international aid were taken back but this didn’t improve the economic circumstances of the country because the corrupt politicians continued to grub the national treasure. In 2006, according to the CNN, IBN and Dawn news corruption reached to the highest peaks of the history of the country and Asian Development Bank decleared Pakistan as the financially weakest state of Continent Asia. President Zardari’s government in addition was not back in the chase regarding satisfying his pouch with wealth from the national treasurer. Crises continue till today in another democratic government.Corruption changes a state’s image dramatically. No justice, no peace and no social security, the things on the spot are injustice, robberies, abductions, strikes, murders and blasts. When the financial or economic conditions of a state deteriorate, every institution gets affective. It is something to be considered that a country rich with agriculture and hundreds of natural resources that can support it without any international aid has collapsed economically. This will certainly happen, if the government is handed over to some corrupt groups.
 "India’s Counterinsurgency Operations Succeed … in Giving Islamic Militants the Upper-Hand”“‘Low-cost, high-return means of achieving strategic objectives” – Islamic insurgents have been used by Pakistani leaders since its creation as a state in 1947 to meet this end. Guerillas remain a special weapon and component of Pakistan’s strategic defense against India. The track record of Pakistan-backed insurgents shows their capacity to perform in ways that are as varied as the terrain across which they operate. With increased fighting taking place in India’s north and Pakistan’s commitment to defending its claim there, speculation is growing that India is falling well behind in the fight against insurgency in its most controversial district.Does Pakistan have the means to defeat Indian forces in Jammu and Kashmir? By 2011, roughly 10,000 experienced insurgents were operating in North Waziristan. During that same year, the number of potential battle-hardened warriors that could come together and resist Indian forces was put as high as 60,000. Taking into account India’s conventional military and field forces across its various service branches – its strategic and tactical nuclear arsenals (including chemical and biological weapons), missile defense program, and even network-centric warfare – India’s borders with its hostile neighbor to the west have played a very central role in their relationship.Pakistani practices of unconventional warfare bring into light, however, a very different and critical aspect of Indian security. There is, more than ever, a growing need to follow through with a dramatic recalibration of its strategy to address the changing nature of its “clashes” with Pakistan in its “border” and contested regions. Heavy focus over recent decades on conventional modes of conflict between the two states has implied that the concept of borders remains an important variable in measuring the states’ respective military capabilities, strategic and tactical options, and prospects for overcoming the other. It is becoming clear that diagnoses for establishing and maintaining a favorable military position over the other cannot continue to retain as much importance on the conventional aspects of warfare as the case has been. Even strategic-level appraisals of India’s military position in its northern region is becoming stifled because of the pervasive belief that unconventional forces might not weigh-in as significantly as the prominent assets of India and Pakistan’s traditional military arsenals.David S. Maxwell (Center for Security Studies / Security Studies Program, Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service, Georgetown University) recently argued that the United States’ concern with the Al Qaeda network and international terrorism following 9/11 has become stale and relatively ineffective due to a lack of focus on the unconventional warfare strategy that Al Qaeda wages against the United States, the West, and several countries of the Middle East. India’s success cannot depend exclusively on the operationality and strength of any single service branch in its military or of the armed forces combined. As a number of promising changes have been made in the United States’ response to unconventional warfare, fewer cases can be found that better exemplify a swift and potentially long-term reversal in India’s control of a vital dimension of its territorial security. This past August and October (2013) brought an increased level of gunfire and mortar shelling in Kashmir and the worst that has been seen in roughly a decade. Eight Indian army soldiers were killed in the incident. Indian forces are strained by the need to protect their lines, their personnel, and civilians in the region; in the course of meeting these demanding conditions, events have almost perfectly exemplified the pressure that India is also facing in deterring and preventing Pakistani militants from pouring into the conflict region.The decade-long insurgency has shown little (if any) signs of abating. Beyond this, the Pakistani government has been accused of arming and training insurgents to continue the fight in the north. Between October 17-15, 2013, officials estimated that 8,500 mortar shells and more than 20,000 rounds of small-arms fire have been unleashed. Civilians have become the primary victims of the fighting – an attractive element for authorities aspiring to increase their commitment to insurgent activity and to respond to the violence by resorting to less-conventional modalities of war.Even though India’s forces are armed for high-profile military confrontations, their abilities to win at low-profile conflict appear to have been relatively sidelined. India’s engagement with Sikh militancy led to a commitment of about 250,000 security forces in Punjab whereas around 400,000-500,000 soldiers have been stationed in Kashmir – a region that falls short of Punjab’s population by about 75%. Cooperation among India’s security forces in Kashmir has proven inefficient in addressing the existence of points of refuge for Pakistani insurgents. Islamic militants to the north also continue to receive support from Pakistan in addition to weapons procurement and training. Sealing the border has become a failed security objective. One of the main expectations of India’s government was to achieve territorial closure with the aim of simply eliminating any isolated pockets of militants over time. While the geographic containment of Pakistani insurgents in specific areas retained its position in India’s counterinsurgency (COIN) strategy, the strategy itself reflects a large part of the Indian military’s conventional “positional war” orientation.India’s evolving COIN strategy shows some very strong signs of being collaborative. Its multifaceted strategy for fighting guerrilla insurgents has raised eyebrows for delivering positive results at times but such instances remain somewhat insulated. The flood of troops that India has sent north into Kashmir is not unlike the United States’ troop surge that took place in central Iraq (2007-2008) under then-General David Petraeus. Improved intelligence and cooperation with tribal leaders were some of the more fruitful aspects of the stabilization process at that time. If India’s COIN strategy is succeeding at all it is on different levels; but signs still point to Pakistani efforts punching above the weight of their Indian adversary. India still focuses on the “old” approach to pouring an excessive number of military forces into an area with the aim of protecting its population.India’s COIN elsewhere in India, just as in Kashmir, has shown that the relationship insurgents have with various ethnic and tribal groups remains one of their strongest assets. Although India has set about updating its COIN tactics and strategy, the pace of its overall efforts in doing so have effectively held India back in winning the fight against insurgents in the north. Rather than taking note of Pakistan’s practice of meeting high returns at low costs, India seems committed, at least for now, to a contradictory trajectory when it comes to countering Islamic insurgency in Kashmir.Scott N. Romaniuk is a graduate researcher at the School of Security and Global Studies, American Military University. He specializes in military and strategic studies with a focus on conventional and asymmetric warfare, insurgency and counterinsurgency, militant Islamic terrorism, and radicalization.
 Boots on the Throat. I am against the use of drones. This one sentence is enough to invite the wrath of many of my liberal friends who would see me as a rightist. Few would think that I am one of the young PTI enthusiasts. Though I do not consider myself a rightist, I insist that the later conclusion, if drawn, is definitely incorrect. I am neither of these yet I am against drones.I do not happen to have any issues with drone identity. I do not see drones as an essential evil force which may raise any terrorist to the status of martyr. Though few respectable politicians think that even if a dog dies in struggle with any American drone then the dog is a martyr too, I dare to disagree. Actually it’s not nature of drone which offends them; it’s the origin of drone. Many may believe that Pakistani nuclear bomb is inherently a force of goodness yet drones are bad as these are from American equipment. Nonetheless, I do not think that by naming a missile, Ghauri, for instance, we can baptize it in some Muslim way. So who is using these drones is of little significance.I do not have high illusions about territorial integrity too. Our generation crammed the concepts of sovereignty in the schools but we are grown up enough to sense that they have no practical usage in Pakistan. How can a drone put a question mark on our territorial integrity when we have already lost half of our country in ’71? Moreover, the way terrorists infiltrate in our country, bomb the places, murder the people and hide in the safe havens within our borders, they mock our sovereignty well enough. So the argument that some unqualified authority of the state is violated by these drones is a shallow one. It is too bookish to be even presented. Besides if such sacrosanct authority is violated and all the state can do is condemn and protest against the violation then state does not have enough authority.The actual issue I see with drone usage is that they place the civilian lives in jeopardy. It does not matter how many terrorists it can potentially kill, the point is that it has killed civilians too. Many would say that the civilians killed are less than 10 percent. That just would put a question mark on our sensitivity as humans. May be we have lost the ability to empathize. Every life counts.Every life counts but insensitivity is comprehensible too. For how long we can keep the count when we lose many in Karachi and Balochistan on daily basis? We have dug too many graves to be shocked by the sight of blood. Yet the state sovereignty is still an endeared subject. The illusions about integrity, independence and writ of the state persist.While arguing about state’s authority we often forget that the first and foremost purpose of every state should be the security of individual life. From welfare to freedom of thought, everything is of secondary importance. I can quote a dozen prominent political thinkers and philosophers who pointed out that the state evolved as a result of the individuals’ need to survive and coexist; instead I would keep it simple and appeal to logic. The most important human need is survival and from this need emanate all other needs be they the need for food or of freedom of expression. Nothing fails a state more than its failure to prevent the loss of human lives. The state confesses that it has failed at least forty thousand times in the last decade. This is a shocking number.So my opposition to drone usage is based on the following two points. First, it puts the civilian lives at risk. Second, the people of Pakistan have not even been consulted on the issue at all.The things could have been easier if instead of issuing condemning statements mourning the deaths of the terrorists, the government could come up with a solution. The solution could be bilateral. By bilateral I do not mean involving the government and the terrorists as many of our right wing political parties would like it to be. It should have been between America and Pakistan. By proper dialogues we could have come up with ways to minimize the risk of civilian deaths. If any covert understanding already exists between the two governments, as it has been claimed by various news agencies, then it should be made public to ensure transparency and accountability.Killings of innocent civilians by bullets of security forces, bombs of terrorist and drones of Americans are equally culpable. As someone rightly said, “When the government’s boot is on your throat, whether it is a left boot or a right is of no consequence.”So, I am against drones, bombs and bullets or any such thing which jeopardize human life. More so, I am against incompetency of the state.26 soldiers were killed by the US and we were at daggers drawn with American government. So many civilians die daily yet nothing is done except wailing these atrocities. At most the terrorists are invited to talks. It seems like the ‘bloody civilians’ have the cheaper blood. Yet the blood of our soldiers too is far less revered than that of the terrorists. After all nothing incited the response as harsh as the death of Hakeemullah Mehsud.Though nothing made me happier in days than demise of Hakeemullah Mehsud yet I am against the use of drones. I guess it is understandable. While wondering about on whose side our political elites are, all we can do is utter a sigh of relief when the drones hit the right targets. As the state does not kill its enemies so we see those being killed by the other agencies while we rejoice by saying one more down.
 Pakistan Divided Over Slain Taliban Chief’s Legacy. The killing of Hakimullah Mehsud, the chief of the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (T.T.P.), an Al-Qaeda affiliate, in a drone strike in Pakistan’s lawless tribal region on Friday is a spectacular counter-insurgency gain for the United States. The State Department had enlisted the T.T.P. among the Foreign Terrorist Organizations while the Federal Bureau of Investigation (F.B.I.) had announced a reward of $5,000,000 for information that led to capture or killing of the 34-year old militant commander.According to the F.B.I., Mehsud was wanted for “his alleged involvement in the December 30, 2009 bombing of a United States military base located near the Afghan town of Khost… the blast from the explosion killed seven United States citizens and injured six other United States citizens.”In addition, he was also charged with conspiring to kill a United States National outside the United States while Washington, on September 1, 2010, listed Mehsud among Specially Designated Global Terrorists.The government of Pakistan, which had announced a relatively smaller bounty on Mehsud, viewed the militant leader as an enemy because he had sanctioned the killing of thousands of Pakistani soldiers, policemen and unarmed civilians. Yet, Islamabad would not go to the extent of agreeing that Mehsud was such a bad guy who deserved to be punished with a drone strike.While the United States has provided about 25 billion dollars to Pakistan to fight the war on terror, the latter has still failed to wholeheartedly own and fight this war. Islamabad remains undecided whether it is a victim or a defender of the Taliban.For instance, the Pakistani Foreign Ministry, ironically, “strongly condemned” the drone strike which killed Mehsud, the dreaded terrorist, arguing that there is “an across the board consensus in Pakistan that these drone strikes must end.”The Pakistani Taliban, despite causing enormous bloodshed, enjoys the support of the central government, besides an expanding right-wing political constituency and sections of the hyper-national media. They regularly oppose Pakistan-led military operations and the U.S.-led drone strikes against the Taliban.The Taliban apologists, headed by former national cricket skipper Imran Khan, often nicknamed as Taliban Khan, who now heads the Pakistan Justice Movement or the P.T.I., got an inch closer to power in the general elections of May 2013. The P.T.I. gained controlof the regional government in the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (K.P.) where the Taliban have strongest presence within Pakistan.Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif’s center-right Pakistan Muslim League (P.M.L.N), which wonan overwhelming majority in the general elections, had promised during its election campaign that it would, if elected, negotiate with the Taliban.The P.M.L. and the P.T.I. both insist that America’s drone strikes will perpetuate instability in Pakistan, increase sympathy for the Taliban and encourage more young people to join the Taliban.Nonetheless, there is no authentic scientific poll or survey to substantiate such assumptions.The detractors of drone strikes fear the consequences of Mehsud’s killing. Prime Minister Sharif had convened an All-Parties Conference (A.P.C.) in September in Islamabad to win the support of all political groups for initiating dialogue with the Taliban. Since Sharif had not clearly stipulated the terms and conditions for talks with the Taliban, negotiations could not commence even a month after the A.P.C.Observing growing public anxiety and incessant media inquiries regarding rapprochement with the Taliban, Sharif said last week that his government had formally established contactwith the Taliban. Much to Sharif’s embarrassment, the Taliban immediately rebutted the Prime Minister’s claim saying that they had not begun any kind of talks with Islamabad yet.The killing of Mehsud on Friday is likely to provide the Taliban a solid pretext to abandon, or at least delay, talks with Islamabad. Talks will not being at least until the T.T.P. nominates a new figure for Mehsud’s coveted position. Unfortunately, neither Pakistan has the commitment nor the capability to completely obliterate the Taliban insurgency. The T.T.P.’s gesture also suggests that the group is currently endeavoring to buy more time till the United States withdraws troops from Afghanistan. The Pakistan Taliban seem to believe that better days and more rewarding deals await them should they refrain from striking any deals with Islamabad at this time.Meanwhile in Pakistan, the United States will possibly get the bulk of the blame from P.M.L. and P.T.I., both ruling parties, for disrupting talks with the Taliban by killing the chief of the terrorist group. The P.T.I. has called for the blockade of supply lines to N.A.T.O. forces in Afghanistan in a pattern of protest which was also witnessed in 2011 soon after thekilling of 24 Pakistani soldiers by N.A.T.O. forces at Salala, on Pak-Afghan border. The N.A.T.O. supplies remained closed for several months until Washington apologized to Islamabad for that incident.Regardless of Pakistan’s outcry, Washington’s drone campaign has proved extremely precise and productive in ousting key Al-Qaeda leadership, dismantling the terrorist organization’s command and structure in elusive tribal regions of Pakistan.These deadly strikes have also eradicated the core leadership of the Pakistani Taliban. Prior to his killing, Mehsud’s deputy, Wali-ur-Rehman (killed in 2013) and two of his predecessors Baithuallh Mehsud (2009) and Nek Muhammad (2004) were all killed in U.S. drone strikes.Islamabad’s inability or unwillingness to go after the perpetrators of terror should not instead be taken as an opportunity to absolve Pakistan of its responsibility to fight terrorism. Considering that country’s limited counter-insurgency capabilities, Islamabad should in fact thank and appreciate Washington for eliminating some of the greatest threats to its national security. Washington has helped its ally to hunt down dangerous employers of terror and tyranny against whom the Islamic republic has failed to take action. 
 Balochistan: A Generation Lost. Rich in natural resources but poor in development Balochistan, Pakistan’s largest but least populous province – is home to about 13 million people with the country’s lowest growth record and worst infrastructure, along with its highest rates of poverty, lowest social indicators for health and education remains a hotbed of insurgency, secretion violence, extra-judicial killings and tribal feuds from the last 65 years. Besides natural gas, petrol and other mineral the province has also got a warm sea with a beautiful Island that appeared as a result of the recent earth-quake that hit Awaran district of the province earlier a month killing at least 1000 and leaving thousands other injured.Despite having huge reserve of the gas, coal, copper, gold with a huge deep sea half of Balochistan’s total population lives below the poverty line. A local Pakistani English newspaper reported that the country’s largest and most resource-rich province is also the most impoverish, it further says that over 60% of the entire population of the province live below the poverty line.Most of the people in the province are frustrated that Balochistan is so poor, even though it has vast reserves of oil, gas and gold which remain largely untapped. And these were the reasons, which compelled ethno Baloch to fight five major wars against State; they accuse the federal government of extracting the province’s natural wealth without providing a corresponding amount of funds on development projects in the province.Ethno Baloch and Brahuis blame Pakistani State for exploiting their natural resources and occupying on their territory. In order to get rid off from Pakistan aggression Baloch fought two widespread guerrilla campaigns against the Pakistani state, seeking independence between 1973-77 and again in an ongoing fight starting in 2005. Leaders say they are seeking an independent Baloch state in the province’s southeast – with the northern Pashtun-majority area free to decide its own fate.They claim Balochistan was semi-independent prior to 1948 and was occupied through the instrument of accession by Pakistan after separation of sub continent in 1947.According to a report published in The Economist  Balochistan was semi-independent under the British Raj and was forcibly annexed in 1948,sparking the first revolt of the people. This event has further resulted five on and of revolt mainly centered on the provincial autonomy and control over the natural resources.The latest movement began in 2005, and went up after the assassination of tribal Baloch nationalist leader Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti, the man who had served as governor and chief minister of the province, but who had increasingly distanced him from the central government and called for an independent Baloch state.Soon after the assassination of Bugti, the situation in Balochistan worsened, Mass arrest, extra-judicial execution, enforced disappearances, sectarian violence, kidnapping for ransom became a common practice in the region.Extra judicial killings and illegal abductions of political activists seem to be an ever-increasing problem of the troubled province today. According to the Vice for Missing Baloch (VBMP) more than 14,000 people from the province have been disappeared over the past nine years and around 700 bullet riddled dead bodies have been dumped. The exact figure of the missing persons in Balochistan is still unknown. The Baloch people in general claims that more than 16000 have gone missing since 2000. In many cases, the state instruments have been found guilty for picking and killing common people in the region.The illegal abduction of common people began after the military dictator General retired pervez Musharraf toppled Civilian government in the country in 19999, who ruled Pakistan as military dictator and president from 1999 to 2008. Rights activists say Musharraf escalated military operation in the province and an increase in enforced disappearances, extra-judicial execution of Baloch peaceful activists and throwing their bullet riddled bodies witnessed. Some analysts believe that the killing of one of the prominent political activist and 86 years old Nawab Akbar Bughti in 2006 is the sole reason of the deteriorated law and order situation in Balochistan.The Human Rights Watch reports says” Balochistan has historically had a tense relationship with Pakistani national government, in large part due to issue of provincial autonomy, control of mineral resources and exploitation, and consequent sense of deprivation. Under President Gen. Pervez Musharraf, Pakistani military ruler from 1999 until 2008, the situation deteriorated markedly.It seems the climate of the kill and dump policy has not changed despite of the change in the government. The violence still continues. Some of the family members have been waiting for the years to get to know about the fate of their loved ones while so many others recovered their dear ones in shape of dead body with several marks of torture on their bodies.Farzana Majeed, the sister of missing Zakir Majeed,, walked from the pillar to post for the recovery his missing brother but yet she has not been informed about the fate of Mr. Majeed abducted who went missing since 8th June 2008. In her interview with the Express Tribune she said” Look at me. I am 27 years old. My brother is 25. I want my life. I have my needs. What kind of life is this? I am spending all of my life in the protest and missing persons’ camp. If my brother has done anything wrong must be accessed to a legal council and punished according to the law .The security forces are enjoying the great deal of impunity despite of the fact they are seriously violating both national and international law. If this continues, the Baloch will lose an entire generation.Missing person’s families are in dire need of assistance on the humanitarian ground. They need to be helped to be engaged in their daily lives instead of spending their time in the long march or the missing persons camp. UN in general should play a pivotal role to stop the ongoing slow motion genocide of Baloch people.
 Balochistan Doctors Threaten En Masse Resignation. QUETTA: Doctors at state-run hospitals in Balochistan have warned the government that they will tender their resignations if the government failed to ensure safe recovery of cardiologist Dr Munaf Tareen and provide effective security to the medical profession.A group of armed men had kidnapped Dr Tareen on September 17 in front of his heart hospital at the Pishin bus stop right in the heart of Quetta city. He is the 26th doctor in Balochistan who has been kidnapped for ransom during the past couple of years.As many as 84 doctors have so far migrated from Balochistan because of threats to their lives and property. They are either living in other parts of the country or have gone abroad. More doctors want to leave Balochistan at the first opportunity in the wake of deteriorating law and order situation.Addressing a news conference Dr Haqdad Tareen, chairman of doctors’ steering committee, said they had two two crucial decisions: “Doctors will establish a force for their security since the government is unable to take action against kidnappers and murderers. Second, doctors will jointly tender their resignations because they consider it better to stay alive rather than be victims of targeted killing and kidnapping,” he told the media.He said at least 18 doctors have been killed in targeted shooting and 26 kidnapped by armed groups but not a single group involved has so far been arrested.“We know that vehicles used in these criminal activities are owned by civilians who are on payroll of security agencies. Government should ban the vehicles with tinted glasses and bearing no number plates.” he said.Responding to a query about who was behind these kidnapping, Haqdad said doctors the government knew that. “The kidnappers of Dr Munaf Tareen had made last contact on October 3 and since then there has been complete silence. I do not know who they are. But they said on phone that Dr Munaf is in their captivity,” he said.Home Minister Sardar Sarfraz Bugti said law enforcement agencies are trying hard to ensure safe recovery of kidnapped doctor. “Investigations are under way to trace the kidnappers,” he told the reporters.
 Balochistan’s Feudal Cabinet. The Balochistan government made history for wrong reasons by delaying the formation of a full cabinet for more than four months.  Last week, the National Party-led coalition government inducted eleven new ministers in the hitherto three-member cabinet. Now, the cabinet comprises of five ministers from the Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz (P.M.L-N), four from the Pakhtunkhawa Milli Awami Party (Pk.M.A.P.) and the National Party (N.P) respectively and one from the Pakistan Muslim League-Quaid-e-Azam. The reason for the inordinate delay in the completion of the cabinet was a blend of rifts among the coalition partners and some constitutional restrictions. Differences broke out between the P.M.L-N, which has the largest number of seats (22) in the provincial assembly, and the nationalists over the distribution of ministries. For obvious reasons, the local leadership of the P.M.N-N. is displeased with the undue influence of Prime Minister Nawaz Shrif over the politics of the province. Mr. Sharif, they whine, has been “too generous” in patronizing the Baloch nationalists. For instance, he nominated Dr. Malik Baloch as the head of the provincial government although his party has only 10 seats in the legislature as compared to 22 of the P.M.L-N. and 14 of the Pk.M.A.P. As a quid pro quo, the P.M.L-N.’s local leadership has asked for a greater representation in the cabinet.The new cabinet has attracted criticism for genuine reasons because it has completely excluded women and religious minorities from the elite-decision making body. Although under the 18th Amendment the government is required to limit the number of ministers to 15, a small cabinet is still not a valid pretext for not including even a single woman and non-Muslim. In addition, the cabinet’s composition also comes as a setback for all of us who cheered the election of Dr. Malik Baloch as Balochistan’s first middle class chief minister. On the contrary, more than 90% of the ministers inducted in the cabinet come from a feudal background. They have been awarded key portfolios not based on their political credentials but tribal influence.With a middle class representative leading the provincial government, progressive circles in Balochistan have legitimate expectations that Dr. Malik will sincerely strive to weaken the tribal structure and liberalize the Baloch society. In order to empower every citizen with education and economic opportunities, the government should consistently follow a policy that overtly isolates greedy and corrupt tribal chiefs. If that is not done, it is futile to anticipate a different outcome from Dr. Baloch as compared to his predecessors.While we emphasize the need for reviewing the composition of the cabinet, one should also be mindful of the fact that the chief minister enjoys too little authority over his own government. At all times, he is expected to respect the wishes of his coalition partners. It is not very easy to persuade him to oust tribal chiefs from his cabinet.  However, what he can do is to make his own party’s representation in the cabinet more democratic. The National Party of the chief minister has always flaunted its middle class credentials. But its decision to offer ministries to so many tribal notables, instead of members of the middle class, women and religious minority groups, is in stark contradiction with the party’s mission.In order to make his government truly democratic, the chief minister must immediately include at least one female and a minority minister in the cabinet and reduce the presence of feudal lords. In Balochistan, women and religious minorities and even minority sects, such as the Shias, regularly face extraordinary challenges.While a large number of Hindus has been compelled to flee the province owing to security problem, the state of women’s rights and their representation remains absolutely abysmal. Access to education and health facilities also remain underachieved goals of Balochistan’s women.  By accommodating women and minorities, the chief minister will be making a much-needed commitment to protecting their rights and also encouraging them to actively participate in daily affairs of the province. A government that snubs the rights of women and minorities merely to please or patronize tribal chiefs will not be deemed sufficiently democratic or representative of all sections of the population.
 Balochistan Earthquake: How Jihadists Convert A Tragedy Into An Opportunity. The recent earthquake has brought backward areas of Balochistan an irrevocable havoc, affecting almost twenty-five thousands families. Balochistan Chief Minister, Dr. Malik Baloch, confirmed this after his brief visit to London. However, the worst has yet to come. In the backdrop of the post-earthquake relief operations, Jihadist organizations are setting up an unprecedented and somehow a successful network of recruitment in the Baloch areas under the disguise of rescuing the long lamented Baloch brothers.In fact, the army, after the failure of its earlier strategies to keep aloof the Baloch youth from joining ranks of the separatists, has deployed Jihaid-humanitarians such as the Jamat-u Dawah, as a new strategy to achieve the desired results. And to our surprise, this strategy has turned out to be a successful one.Balochistan has a long history of natural catastrophes; earthquake, a particular one, is because of the fault lines this region has which in turn is an effect of unstable plate tectonic movements. In 1935, Quetta witnessed a horrible earthquake with all its buildings collapsed to ground. Only the then cantonment separated from the city by deep canal, where the whole city sewerage gets it outlet, survived.However, the recent earthquakes, tracking from the one that happened a couple of years ago in Ziarat – a picnic and historical spot – and following years, a dreadful one that stuck Mashkhel, adjacent to Pak-Iran boarder, has been accompanied by a number of Jihadi-militant organizations establishing their network in the region.The Jamat-ud Dawah was one of the organizations which surpassed other organizations even the then government in helping out the earthquakes affectees.Even today, by travelling through those areas, tents, disposable shelter homes and the likes, over which the Dawa name is conspicuously written, vindicates the organization’s active participation in working for rehabilitation of the affectees.Moreover, it was Dawah that took precedence over other NGOs and the Pak Army to record their name as the first organization that went to Mashkhel and helped the quake victims.This development is of great significance – because of its ‘bizarreness’ – that an organization like Dawah, accused of sponsoring terrorism in Kashmir, has established its network both in Pashtun and Baloch populated areas; Ziarat and Mashkhel, respectively. For, Dawah which primarily aims at waging Jihad against India in Kashmir  with the help of the Lashkar-e-Taiba, had never been ‘headache’ of neither of Pashtuns nor Balcohs.On contrary, it is the province wherein distribution of power and economic resources’ belongingness are more contested – which are ‘boarder confined concerns’ – instead, as is the case in Punjab and the Khyber Pakhtunkhawa, in particular, where Jihadis’ ‘trans-boarders expansionary’ vision finds conducive environment.The Baloch youth intermeshing with the Dawah network testifies that the network has just gained its monument. With a massive destruction inflicted by the nature, Dawah is trying its best to turns the devastation unleashed by the nature into an opportunity for its two pronged strategy: to rescues and rehabilitate the affectees invoking empathy for their ‘strayed’ brothers – the Balochs – and to translate the ‘deceitful’ humanitarian image into a resort by establishing network of the Dawah.Sequences of the developments implicates that Dawah is increasing its activities and deepening its presence in the previously ‘unconquered’ region under the tacit affirmativeness of the military.Establishment of Dawah in Balochistan, if am not speculating into a remote and far less possibility, will serve two functions: first, it will prove, as it is, a successful strategy deployed under the patronage of the military to prevent the Baloch youth form joining separatists’ ranks.Second, the military can use, in future, the Dawah in par with other militant Jihaidi organizations, now working in Balochistan. The later development is a very unique but not unusual: with the severing loyalties of other Jihades, based in Balochistan and operating across the border in Afghanistan, Dawah – a most reliable organization which our military can trust – can be deployed anytime against the ‘other’ Jihades to undo their ‘pernicious’ intentions against Pakistan.Adding into the misery of Balochistan, lamenting not only a massive fund raising campaign for the affectees by leading news channels, however there are exceptions, focusing too much on the two premiers’ meeting but also the news channel missed the opportunity to criticize our military for pampering organizations like Dawah – this time in Balochistan – that has sabotaging impact on the peace talks between India and Pakistan.Lastly, besides paying attention to schism between the province and center, the public must also pay attention how our military is covertly breeding afresh generation for militancy.
 aspects of governance, security, natural resources, and disaster management. Assessing the flood damage and response mechanism in 2010, the UN agency for human settlements, UN Habitat, had clearly warned that Balochistan had fewer resources than the other provinces and its capacity to cope with calamity was very limited and that a major humanitarian response would be required to assist the people. Despite these grave realities and generous offer for humanitarian assistance, the NDMA prohibited international agencies, aid organisations and INGOs from directly assisting the flood-affected people of the province.Balochistan’s miseries multiplied when the ministries of foreign affairs and interior imposed the ‘project no-objection certificate’ condition for humanitarian organisations. Since Punjab and other provinces were declared open-access areas, all aid agencies redirected their efforts towards Punjab. The effects of those policies can still be felt in Balochistan, with half a million affectees living in makeshift tents in appalling conditions.The NDMA’s biased decision vis-a-vis Balochistan led to distressing developments. In 2010, the director-general of the provincial disaster management authority informed the media and the provincial cabinet that the ‘project no-objection certificate’ condition had slowed down the pace of relief operations, resulting in countless deaths related to water-borne diseases. In addition, the 2010-flood defacement of eastern Balochistan remains unrepaired.Previously, in July 2007, the then prime minister Shaukat Aziz used the same blackout policy and announced that “Pakistan will not take foreign aid from any country to overcome the losses and devastation caused by Cyclone Yemyin”. The 2007 floods severely affected the Makran region and resulted in massive loss of lives and property.Balochistan has been in crisis since 1999, facing the wrath of both nature and the state. Between 1999-2003 a drought hit the province – economic resources vanished and disease killed thousands of people.In 2005, Musharraf’s ruthless military operation resulted in 200,000 displaced people, hundreds were killed and disappeared, and political assassinations of senior Baloch leaders were committed. It not only destroyed the social fabric but put an irreparable dent on the fragile economic situation.The current earthquake too will have a devastating impact on the socio-economic conditions and aggravate the inequality that persists among the provinces as result of Islamabad’s discriminatory policies.Disallowing or discouraging international aid organisations and persistently imposing an information and humanitarian blackout will further harm Islamabad’s already tarnished and anti-Baloch image.The policy of humanitarian blackout or shutdown is contradictory to the principles of human rights and humanitarianism. Countries with clear-headed leaders and credible institutions use such crises as opportunities to reach out to people and as a means of reconciliation. The Pakistani state, however, uses all such means to inflict more pain and misery and exploits a crisis as a tool to strengthen its grip on all affairs including the ‘humanitarian’ aspect.The situation in the affected areas is unspeakably bad, with hundreds of thousands living under the open skies in scorching heat. Only experienced humanitarian organisations, not military or security forces, understand the basic principles of emergency response.Disallowing international aid agencies, declining assistance from friendly countries and shutting down an entire province in its hour of need is not humanitarian service – it is a crime. 
 Calamity-hit Balochistan. NATURAL disasters have a greater impact on the least developed regions. How poor infrastructure, the absence of a communication network and widespread poverty can aggravate the catastrophe in human and economic terms is evident from the powerful earthquakes that struck Balochistan last month.The province is currently reeling under the devastating impact of the first, 7.7 magnitude earthquake which was followed by another one days later. The death toll is reported to have crossed 500, hundreds of villages and thousands of mud-brick homes have been demolished.Six districts — Awaran, Kech, Gwadar, Panjgur, Chaghi and Khuzdar — are the most affected areas where over 90pc of the villages have been reportedly destroyed affecting more than 300,000 people.Fundamental problems of development have contributed to the province’s vulnerability to the catastrophic effects of natural hazards. Environmental degradation, due to mismanagement of natural resources, inefficient public policies and delayed and misguided investments in infrastructure have raised the costs of the quake disaster. The earthquake has added to the health, social, and economic burden of the impoverished province.The disaster caused by the earthquake has exposed the poor development planning and disaster management in Balochistan. It draws attention to the need for integrating disaster prevention and mitigation efforts in development activities. The calamity-hit province requires a development plan that is long-term and sustainable.Balochistan has a unique geology. It is because of its geographical formations that it is more prone to natural disasters. The province has four geological regions — the central mountain ranges, the Chaghi hills and Raskoh ranges, the Makran ranges and the Kharan basin. There are many areas in northern Balochistan, including Quetta, which are located in an active seismic zone. The Quetta earthquake of 1935 was one of the most deadly with 35,000 fatalities. It devastated Quetta and the adjoining areas.The Makran coastal basin comprises the central and coastal Makran ranges, the Pab hills and the sub-mountainous areas in the southwest. The Hub, Porali, Hingol and Dasht are the principal rivers of the basin with erratic discharges. During the recent flash floods and heavy rains, the major rivers were in high flood.The cyclone that hit the Balochistan coastline in 2007 also exposed serious flaws of design at some points of the Makran coastal highway after parts of it were washed away by rains and floods. It was pointed out that the coastal highway project had been undertaken without proper planning. Flaws in its designing at some locations had surfaced as no study or data was available for annual rains and floods.A project like the coastal highway requires accurate studies to build as it is not intended for a limited period or limited traffic. Inadequate planning turned the coastal highway project into a white elephant. The coastal highway was rehabilitated at a cost of Rs300 million after it was hit by cyclone and heavy rains in 2007. Redesigning the highway will consume more funds.There is a dire need to integrate risk reduction in development planning and investments in Balochistan. Economic planners and policymakers should also focus on disaster prevention and mitigation in the development agenda for the province. The federal government should help the province build permanent technical and operational capacity to manage risk reduction. This would promote a process of sustainable development.It has been observed that the government’s development and disaster-related policies mainly focus on emergency response, which results in serious underinvestment in natural hazard prevention and mitigation. What is needed is a more strategic and rapid response to disasters and a strategy for integrating disaster prevention and mitigation efforts into the range of development activities.A national disaster management fund needs to be established for disaster-related financing. The fund would deal with key areas like prevention and mitigation, emergency response, rehabilitation and reconstruction.The degradation of natural resources increases the risk of disaster. The current increase in the frequency of disasters may reflect changing climate patterns. The authorities have also adopted a short-term approach of merely treating the symptoms. There is a need to break the cycle of destruction and reconstruction and address the root causes of vulnerability.Key issues related to disaster management include lack of strategic direction, inadequate infrastructure to handle disaster and lack of coordination of different services. What is needed is a more proactive and comprehensive approach to disaster management, encompassing both pre-disaster risk reduction and post-disaster recovery.There is a great need for developing national strategies for risk reduction, which will necessitate building a national legal and regulatory framework for bringing together the economic planning departments, provincial and local governments and civil society organisations. It will ultimately assess inter-sectoral priorities and allocate separate budgets for risk reduction.It has been observed that poor households and communities are more vulnerable to natural hazards, as they take a long period to recover from the deadly effects of disasters. The government must take steps for supporting the poor, reducing their vulnerability and recovering from disasters.The government should create conditions for the development of insurance markets and design economic and regulatory incentives for risk-reduction behaviour. Steps should be taken to stimulate coordinated actions and to mobilise regional resources for investment in risk mitigation.
 Pakistan Qake Highlights Balochistan Ethnic Fractures. A powerful earthquake in Pakistan’s south-western province of Balochistan killed 400 people and affected more than 300,000 last Tuesday.A week on, the disaster – and the Pakistani government’s response to it – have exposed the deep ethnic fault-lines threatening the stability of this nuclear-armed country.Half an hour’s drive on a dirt track outside the town of Awaran lies the village of Teertaj. Last week, when the area was struck by a 7.7 magnitude earthquake, 95% of the mud brick houses in the village collapsed.Continue reading the main storyMany of those who survived were deeply traumatised and suffered fractures – broken arms, ribs and head injuries. The main hospital in Awaran did not have an X-ray machine. Those who could manage to do so rushed their injured relatives to hospitals in the port city of Karachi – between six and seven hours’ drive away.Within the next 48 hours or so, when Pakistani soldiers arrived in Teertaj with a truckload of tents and food supplies, the villagers turned them away. “We told them we did not want anything to do them,” says a villager.InsurgencyResentment against the army and the official paramilitary force, the Frontier Corps, is not limited to a few villages. It runs deep in Balochistan, Pakistan’s largest province in terms of area, rich in resources, but also its most impoverished region.Thousands of Pakistani soldiers have been deployed there, and effectively control large parts of the province. The army says it is fighting for the territorial integrity of Pakistan. It is battling separatist Baloch insurgents, who they allege are being backed by foreign forces, namely India.But the army itself is viewed as an outsider force, as it is largely composed of ethnic Punjabis and Pashtuns. The troops are accused of carrying out large-scale enforced disappearances and custodial deaths of Baloch nationalists – charges they deny.“There is not a village in this area which has not experienced abuses by the Pakistani army. Several of my friends and colleagues have been caught and killed in cold blood; some remain missing to this day,” says 29-year old Baloch Khan, head of one of several Baloch nationalist groups, the Baloch Student Organisation (Azad).He was a student of history at a university in Karachi, but abandoned higher education and took to the mountains of Balochistan. The faction of Baloch nationalists he now leads is outlawed by the authorities and described as an anti-Pakistan militant group.Today, like the rest of his comrades, Baloch Khan is on the run from the Pakistani security agencies. “If they find me, they will kill me,” he says.We met him at a secret location in the middle of nowhere in Awaran district. He sat there in front of a straw hut surrounded by a couple of mud-brick houses. For someone opposing the mighty Pakistani army, he appeared surprisingly calm and at ease with his surroundings.“This is my homeland, which has been occupied by the Pakistani army. We are fighting for a free Balochistan,” he says.Are you a militant? Do you carry weapons for your protection, I asked.“No,” he says. “I carry books with me. I like to read about people like Ho Chi Minh and Che Guevara.”But surely, these are desperate times, when survivors of earthquake need tents, medical supplies and doctors?I asked him, why disrupt the relief effort?“Our people are desperate for help, but how can we take aid from the same people who have destroyed our homes, killed our people and subjugated us for decades?” he asks.Troop build-upBaloch nationalists fear the army is using the calamity in Awaran to deploy more troops and prepare for a fresh military operation against the insurgents.Army officials admit that since the earthquake, their base in Awaran has expanded, with reinforcements being flown in and trucked in from the provincial capital, Quetta, as well as Karachi.But they say the deployment is to safeguard the relief operation.“Our rescue and relief teams have been fired upon. Our helicopters have been attacked,” says Maj Gen Mohammed Samrez Salik, general officer commanding of 33 Infantry Division. “They are trying to hamper our relief activities. But we are fighting back.”He recognises that the army faces resentment from some of the disaster-hit villages, but insists the mood is shifting.“People can see we are trying to help them. They can see we are on their side. And [given] the kind of respect I am getting when I visit some of these villages, I have no reason to believe we are viewed as an occupation force.”Privately, other army officials say that the force sometimes has to do what needs to be done to establish the writ of the state.One official said: “If one of their guys has killed several of my men, what treatment do you expect me to give him when we catch him?” 
 Two Soldiers, Engaged in Balochistan Relief Operations, Killed in Mashkai. MASHKAI: Two army soldiers were killed and two others sustained injuries in a landmine explosion while they were carrying out relief work in Mashkai, Balochistan on Wednesday, Express News reported.The landmine was planted on the roadside and exploded when the soldiers were busy in relief work.This is not the first instance when violence has come in the way of relief work.On September 27, militants fired on a helicopter carrying relief goods to Mashkai.The helicopter of National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) Chairman Major General Muhammad Saeed Aleem was also targeted with rockets on September 26, while it was on its way to Mashkai for earthquake relief work. Major General Aleem remained unhurt in the attack.EarthquakeThe first earthquake had hit Balochistan on September 24, killing at least 350 people and injuring hundreds more.Another 7.2-magnitude quake furthered the damage when it struck the area on September 28.A senior FC officer had said that most of the stricken places in Awaran are highly risky areas for relief workers and provincial functionaries as it is a hub of Baloch nationalist militants.Mashkai – a sub-district of Awaran – has been under the militant command of nationalist guerrilla commander, Dr Allah Nazar who has been confronting the FC and Pakistan Army for a long time.
 Balochistan’s Hinglaj Mata Temple. The Hinglaj Mata Temple is situated in a desolated and hilly area of Balochistan’s Lasbela District. It is quite famous in all over the Sub-contient, especially among many Kuldevi, Kshatriya and other Hindu communities of India because it is a Hindu pilgrimage place in Balochistan, Pakistan.It is approximately 250 km (155 miles) from Karachi, Pakistan’s most populated city. Moreover, it is near the peak of one of the mountains of the Makran Coastal Range. And from the Indus Delta River and the Arabian Sea, it is 120 km. The area of Hinglaj Mata Temple is located in the rugged mountains, and its journey is extremely tiring.The pilgrimage of Hinglaj Mata Temple is also famous among the local Muslims, particularly the Zikri Balochs (predominantly an ethnic Baloch group). They call it “Nani Ki Haj.”There are water kunds (pits) in proximity to Hinglaj Shrine; these are: Til Kund, Kheer Kund or Briham Kund, Khali kund and Maha Kali kund at up to the stream of the river Hingol, going downwards to the Hinglaj Mata and kali Mata kunds.It is said about Til kund that Black Til (corn) when rubbed with hands in Til kund water still becomes white. And about Kheer Kund, it is famous that mailk used to fall, but, presently, water of springs fall through Herb “Mamera” and it is very beneficial for eye sight. Maha Kund is at a height in the mountain.h1There are also worship places of Ganesh Deva, Asha Pura Mata, Hanumanji, Mata Kali, Gru Gorakh Nath, Gru Nanik, Ramjarokha, Bethak, Aneel Kund on Chorsi Mountain, Braham Kund, Kali Kund and Maha Kali Kund. In the way, Chandra Goop, Khari Nadi, Aghora Pooja and the main pilgrimage place which is the Asthan of Mata Hinglaj Devi.Kali Matha AsthanKali Mata Asthan is few yards away in a mountain cave from Aashapura where a Murti of Kali Mata is fixed.At this place, devotees offer Coconut, Chunri, Agarbati, Missri, Khoya, Bali (goat sacrifice) and Pooja Arti ceremony, which is performed over there.Predominantly the Baloch ethnic group, Zikris, are also followers of this Devi. They also worship here and call it “Nani Matha.”In front of Kali Murti, there is a large pit of water, which comes from up stream.Hinglaj Asthanh2It is the main pilgrimage place for devotees where there is a small old Temple in a cave of mountain in original form with open place for devotees. Here yagan, which is offered by devotees favoured with Darshan of Hinglaj Mata. They take sacred bath in Hinglaj Kund (Pit), which is in front it.  Then, after that, devotees go through Gorabh Parsav ceremony under the ground channel, under Hinglaj Mata Murti to complete Yatra.  In the past, devotees would be called “Kapris,” who used to adopt sanyas, renunciation, thereafter, by wearing Mala of Tharma.Guru Gorakh Shilla (Stone)It is a big piece of about 15 feet diameter and 12 feet high lying of Hinglaj Shrine. It is, as the Hindu people say, to have been thrown by Guru Gorakh Nath from the Chorsi Mountain, which is at about 2 km away from here and its diameter is equal to present Aneel Kund (water well) on the Chorsi Mountain. On this mountain, Agarbati Dhopp, Namaskher is made.They also say that the pilgrims, who cannot climb up the Chorsi Mountain, take four rounds around this big stone.h3This writer was further updated about the Hinglaj Shrine that before pre-partitition days, Rajput King used to come to Hinglaj Shrine for performing pilgrimage from Rajistan and Gujrat provinces of Indus. And at that very time, there were no roads. The devotees had to pass through jungles, sandy routes, deserts, mountains, and rivers, full of danger on the back of camels. It would also take months in travelling. But unlike previous times, it has now become easy to travel to Matha Hinglaj Asthan.They further added, “The devotees from all over the world would come to the Hinglaj Matha Teerath since centuries. Rven Hindus Rama Avatar,Great Guru Nanik, Mekhan Avatar of laxman, and other great saints, Rishis and Hindu scholars paid visit to Hinglaj Matha Teerath.”Sham Kumar, a prominent Hindu scholar based in Balochistan, said: ” Hindu sect, Nath Panthis, whose founder was Gru Gork Nath, used to visit this shrine in 6, 00 A.D. Also, the Sindhi mystic poet, Shah Abdul Latif Bhittai, would visit the Hinglaj Shrine. He has written a poem about Hinglaj Mata Temple”.In recent years, devotees from Africa and European countries have visited and performed Hinglaj Matha Teerath.h5Undoubtedly, Hinglaj Matha Temple has remained famous even in Mahabharet period.Samrat Vikramjeet, the king of India also visited Hinglaj Matha Temple for performing pilgrimage after conquering the all India.Raja Todarmal of Mughal regime visited Hinglaj matha Temple, too.Besides them, other well known names who visited Hinglaj Shrine are: Bihari Ma, Raja Bhaj Singh, Raja Madho Singh, Raja Jagat Singh, of Jaipur, Dada Mekhan, the great saint of Gujrat, who was first called Kapris of Matha and, after this, all the devotees are called Kapris (who wear Mala in their necks), visited Hinglaj Matha Teerath.Moreover, there is a much famous story among the Hindus about the Hinglaj Mata Temple that the daughter of Prajapati Daksha, Sati, married to the God Shiva against her father’s wishes. Due to this reason, Daksha organized a great Yajna, but didn’t invite Sati and Shiva. Uninvited, Sati reached the yajna-site, where Daksha ignored Sati and vilified Shiva. Then, after that, Sati couldn’t withstand this insult. She committed suicide by jumping into the sacrificial fire. Sati died but her dead body didn’t burn. After that the grief-stricken Shiva wandered the universe with the corpse of Sati. Lastly, God Vishnu cut up the body of Sati into 52 parts. The Head of Sati is believed to have fallen at Hinglaj.h6Unlike previous times, pathetically, Hindus are now living dangerously in Balochistan. They, after visiting the Hinglaj Mata Temple, were less in number over there. In the past, Hindus would be visible in large number in the mountains of Hinglaj Matha. They would nonchalantly come from inside and outside of the country to visit Hinglaj Mata Teerath. But now it is the condition that they cannot visit the Hinglaj Mata Temple from its contigous districts.As compared to other districts of Balochistan, Lasbella District, where Hingal Temple is situated, is considered to be safe for the Hindus. And, there are many Hindus, who have settled in Lasbella District of the other places of Balochistan..“The Baloch and Hindus have been living just like brothers for centuries. We even attend each other funerals. And it is manifest to everyone that the Baloch and Hindus are facing alike problems. They are not complainants about the Baloch people. They, if you ask, call themselves Baloch and they are Balochs,” said Asif Magsi, who is a resident in Lasbella District of Balochistan.h10Lastly, the present government of Dr. Malik Baloch ought to resolve the manifold issues of the Hindus, at any cost. They are pioneers of this land, i.e., Balochistan. They are living since time immemorial over here. Therefore the problems of the Hindus must be resolved so that they may live peacefully and visit Hinglaj Mata Temple without any fear.
 Dear Mr Prime Minister. In this very critical moment of history I am compelled to write this brief letter to remind you about your role as the chief executive of Pakistan, and the commitments you have made to the people of Pakistan, more particularly the downtrodden people of Balochistan.While your government may have pleasant stories for some, Balochistan is on the verge of death with a sharp increase in human rights violations, humanitarian crisis, and socio-economic erosion.It’s a heart-wrenching fact that since your takeover as prime minister around 90 barbarically tortured corpses of Baloch youth have been dumped in different parts of Balochistan and Karachi.Beginning from the All-Parties Conference held in London on July 7-8 in 2007, and as a leading opposition figure before the May elections, you made countless commitments condemning atrocities against the Baloch and demanded fair and just rights for them.The London APC’s resolution said that “today Balochistan bleeds under the heels of an army operation, where gunship helicopters are used for silencing dissenting political voices.”In reality, the current situation in the province is far worse than what it was in 2007. Balochistan’s sufferings have increased manifold. The province’s home and tribal affairs department’s recent report revealed horrific accounts of kill-and-dumps. The report says that 592 mutilated, killed and dumped bodies of Baloch political activists have been found from 2010 to September 2013.The worrying fact is that this barbaric trend has seen a sharp increase during the first three months of your government.Mr Prime Minister, Balochistan has unique socio-cultural and political characteristics including countless resources. This you are aware of and you recently signed a number of MoUs with Chinese companies without reaching out and initiating any ‘memorandum of political understanding’ with the people of Balochistan.My concerns are not just political – I worry because the ongoing conflict, military operation and immunity and impunity for crime and corruption have severely damaged Balochistan’s social, economic and political fabric. All this will have severe consequences both for the Baloch and the region.The province’s statistics depict a very bleak scenario – much worse than war-torn African states. Just imagine – 63 percent of its population lives below the poverty line compared to Punjab’s 19 percent. Data on health, employment, nutrition intake, infrastructure and education is equally grim and sadly terribly below the national average.Mian Sahib, there is a difference between being in opposition and being in power. The people of Balochistan are expecting much more from you. I would like to remind you that glitzy mega-projects without a genuine conflict resolution process are seen as an attempt to further exploit and marginalise the people.Skyscrapers and guzzling machines are no guarantee for peace. Huge, but controversial, mega projects failed to legitimise General Musharraf’s policies. His disguised-in-development colonisation didn’t envisage any political harmonisation, local participation and economic trickledown. His visionless and dictatorial policies further weakened the very delicate relations between the Baloch and Pakistan.Mr Prime Minister, it’s time to move on from political rhetoric. It’s time for genuine political action.If you remember, during our meeting in the Prime Minister’s Secretariat on June 12, 2013, I shared a brief note with you on behalf of the Balochistan National Party – a list of CBMs and recommendations on political stabilisation, economic development and a plan for the socio-economic uplift of the people of Balochistan.But regrettably instead of taking into account those CBMs, your government unilaterally signed a number of controversial projects with Chinese companies on contentious projects. Gwadar is one of them.Instead of sober, genuine and tested political process, your government is encouraging further militarisation of the already heavily militarised Baloch region. The recent supply of bullets and machine gunsis not a political gesture; it symbolises war and conflict escalation.Musharraf ruled Pakistan for nine years; he used sophisticated weapons and barbaric torture methods but miserably failed to subdue the politically conscious Baloch people.Balochistan demands respect, justice, and fair political partnership, not machine guns and soldiers. It is a society deprived of basic human needs. Sixty percent of its people lack drinking water, electricity and basic health facilities. Despite sitting on the world’s largest copper-gold deposit, two million children in Balochistan lack decent education.Mian Sahib, it’s impossible to rebuild Baloch trust on the state and its institutions without a time-tested conflict resolution process. A policy of more guns and more soldiers will only lead to more chaos and distrust.There is no doubt that security-sector reform is a crucial aspect of the Baloch problem. But these reforms should not be limited to enhance the killing capacity of the non-ethnic Baloch security apparatus to single out and suppress the ethnic Baloch.Your government must engage experts and identify the victims and ‘beneficiaries’ of the conflict. ‘Baboos’ with fancy PowerPoint presentations have misled many leaders in the past – and I am scared that they will continue to influence your policies too.Death and destruction in many parts of Pakistan, particularly in Balochistan, have become a huge money-making opportunity. Many powerful elements within the state structure prefer a continuation of suppressive policies.The conflict in Balochistan has created a complex power imbalance. And genuine conflict resolution process will definitely expose such elements and diminish their unnaturally grown role and authority.The rubberstamped Balochistan Assembly has no value and has miserably failed to deliver on pertinent issues as a legitimate legislature. The May 2013 election was political management of high standards. In Balochistan, state machinery, as usual, ensured fulltime ‘free, fair and transparent selection’.Mr Prime Minister, it’s a harsh but undeniable fact that Pakistan has physically shrunk in a few districts. Except a few areas in central Punjab including Lahore and Islamabad there is no place where people walk or sleep without fear.Following political and economic marginalisation, ethnic and religious minorities are struggling for their physical survival. A transparent profile of killings, human rights violations and marginalisation indicates the systematic targeting of marginalised communities with impunity.Mian Sahib, a leader who believes on rhetoric can neither reverse this cycle of violence nor correct this deliberately created chaos. To deal with such complex issues a leader must demonstrate extraordinary courage and political will to undo the damage.Balochistan deserves a politically mature and daring solution such as a comprehensive peace agreement with the real stakeholders.The multi-step process must focus on issues such as cessation of hostilities, implementation of agreed CBMs, talks and agreements on political, economic and security aspect of the crisis. And most importantly, avoiding a complete sale out of the Balochistan coast, coal, copper-gold, gas and natural wealth until the conflict is fully resolved.Balochistan’s political conflict and its unaddressed genuine grievances need courageous decision-making by a brave leader.
 Negotiating With (Exiled) Baloch Leaders. It is unclear what Balochistan Chief Minister Dr. Malik Baloch actually means when he says he will ‘take’ a jirga to exiled Baloch leaders Harbiyar Marri and Bramdagh Bugti to convince them to sit on the negotiation table with the Pakistani government. A Jirga is normally ‘convened’ not ‘taken’ to a place. However, since the enraged nationalist leaders are currently living in exile, the head of the provincial government plans to send a delegation of tribal notables and influential political figures to Europe to negotiate with them.Before doing that, the C.M. says he is going to convene an all-parties conference (A.P.C.) on Balochistan in order to develop a mechanism to push the disillusioned Baloch leaders to talk to the government. Dr. Malik is so enthusiastic about his  plans that he is not deeply concerned about the outcome of his strategy. He says he does not worry at this point whether or not the Baloch leaders will heed his request. Yet, he is determined to establish contact with them and also optimistic about the outcome of his endeavors.In the past, different official leaders shared their plans about possible talks with Baloch armed groups and exiled leaders in an effort to buy more time. It is too early to judge whether Dr. Malik is also buying time like his predecessor Nawab Aslam Raisani or he is struggling to conceal the rifts within his own coalition government over the issue of cabinet formation and governance.When Dr. Malik recently visited London, he did not meet any of the Baloch leaders. He told the London-based correspondents that he would not meet with the exiled leaders because, he admitted, the government had still not taken ample confidence building measures to win the Baloch trust.The recent A.P.C. in Islamabad, which mainly focused on the issue of terrorism and talks with the Taliban, entrusted Dr. Malik the responsibility to approach all Baloch leaders and initiate talks with them. Since the A.P.C. was also attended by the heads of the Army and the Inter-Services Intelligence (I.S.I.), it felt as if Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and the Chief of Army Staff General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani were on the same page on Balochistan. Previously, Generl Kayani had implicitly said that the army would only support talks with those who believe in the supremacy of the Pakistani constitution. That said, he would not negotiate with those who call for a free Balochistan.The prime minister and the army chief’s expression of trust in the chief minister has a positive as well as a negative connotation.On the positive side, there seems to be an acknowledgement of the fact that Balochistan is a region with its own traditions and political culture. A part of the problem in the past has been Islamabad’s ignorance about Balochistan and the failure to learn the art of negotiating with Baloch tribal and political leaders. General Musharraf, for instance, made a  blunder in his dealing with Nawab Akbar Bugti. Without realizing the social and political consequences of killing a prominent tribal chief and a key political figure, Musharraf ignited fire in Balochistan by ordering the killing of Bugti. We assume that the prime minister and the army chief realize that a Baloch chief minister would be an appropriate interlocutor between the federal government and the Baloch.  At least, he can prepare the ground for more serious talks in the future.On the negative side, it seems that Sharif and Kayani are intentionally distancing themselves from a critical national issue. We all know that the Balochistan chief minister is too weak and powerless to carry the burden of  such a big conflict. So far, the Pakistan army, the Frontier Corps (F.C.) and the intelligence agencies have been blamed for orchestrating the conflict in Balochistan. Therefore, it is the top civil and military bosses in Islamabad, not the provincial chief minister, who have to come forward, own their old mistakes and provide a road-map for peace in Balochistan.There are genuine reasons to be cynical about Sharif’s commitment.Last month, Sharif raised the Balochistan issue with the Indian Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh in his meeting in New York on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly. Subscribing to the military-promoted narrative of the alleged Indian involvement in Balochistan, the prime minister asked his  Indian counterpart to refrain from interfering in Balochistan. Sharif’s flagrant discussion on Balochistan with Dr. Singh shows that Islamabad still does not feel the guilt of its own crimes against the Baloch and it blames other countries for the mess in the country’s largest province. As the prime minister of the world’s largest democracy, Dr. Singh should have instead raised the issue of human rights abuses in Balochistan and reminded his Pakistani counterpart that groups like the Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch  have repeatedly blamed the Pakistani security services, not their Indian counterparts, for political assassinations and dumping the bullet-riddled dead bodies of the Baloch civilians.Without the full support of the army, Dr. Malik would remain so powerless that even talks with the Baloch Students Organization (B.S.O.-Azad), the pro-independence student outfit, if they ever take place, will not yield any positive outcome.In Pakistan’s large cities, mainly in Islamabad, some confusion is now rising within the army, the government, the media and the policy circles as to why a “nationalist chief minister” should face any hardship negotiating with fellow nationalists. It is very important to make a clear distinction between the Dr. Malik-type of nationalists and the ones fighting in the mountains and supporting the movement from overseas. The sooner the establishment makes the distinction between the two, the better it is to skip illusions.Dr. Malik type of nationalists enjoy zero influence over those who ask for independence. They do not share the same goals and modes of struggle. In fact, the Baloch armed groups view Dr. Malik and his types as ‘traitors’ who have ‘sold out’ to Islamabad. Therefore, they are keen to target these pro-Pakistan leaders wherever they see them and absolutely unwilling to talk to them.Meanwhile, there are at least three major leaders that the government would ultimately have to talk to in order to initiate serious dialogue.First, Dr. Allah Nazar, head of the Baloch Liberation Front (B.L.F.),  is the only one among the three leaders who is still inside Balochistan. Today, the B.L.F. operates in more districts than any other insurgent groups. Even the Baloch Liberation Army (B.L.A.) and the Baloch Republican Army (B.R.A.) do not have similar influence in the non-tribal parts of the province. The B.L.F. is active in Kech, Gwadar, Panjgur, Awaran and Lasbela districts.Second, the government should talk to Harbiyar Marri, the London-based pro-independence leader who significantly influences sections of the pro-independence groups. Although he has never confirmed his affiliation with the B.L.A., it is speculated that the group does not defy his instructions.Third, Nawabzada Bramdagh Bugti, the Switzerland-based head of the Baloch Republican Party, must be approached for talks. Mr. Bugti has a large following among the Bugti tribesmen and even outside the tribal region.The government does not need another A.P.C. on Balochistan because parties that are likely to participate in it do not matter with regards to the Baloch issue. Those who matter are either in the mountains or living on exile.The task of negotiating with the Baloch requires consistent commitment and engagement. The government should prove its sincerity and willingness to talk to the Baloch leaders with substantial confidence building measures.
 Balochs Protest Outside White House As Sharif Meets Obama. WASHINGTON, DC: Members of the Baloch community protested outside the White House on Wednesday morning as Pakistan’s Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif met with U.S. President Barrack Obama as a part of his three-day long trip to Washington, D.C.The protesters, who came from different U.S. cities, condemned Islamabad’s fresh military operations against Baloch political activists, including the kill and dump activities and forced disappearances attributed to Pakistani intelligence agencies. Native Balochs from Irani and Pakistani Balochistan attended the protest while several American citizens also participated in the march outside the U.S. president’s residence.The protest was led by Dr. M. Hossein Bor, a prominent Baloch lawyer who had also testified at the U.S. Congressional hearing on Balochistan in February 2012 and the participants included Laurie Deamer, the U.S. representative of the Baloch Human Rights Council.The protesters carried posters and banners to highlight the situation in Balochistan saying that the ground realities of the province had not changed despite the elections of May 2013 as Balochistan remained under the control of the Pakistan army and the security forces.The protesters also called upon Washington to stop Pakistan’s aid as they argued that American tax-payers’ money was being used by Islamabad to carry out human rights abuses against Baloch political opponents.laurieOne placard read: “Obama: Baloch friend or foe?” while some others criticized Islamabad for stopping relief operations in Balochistan’s earthquake-hit areas. “Paki govt: stops aid to Baloch earthquake victims,” read another placard.It was the largest, and probably the only, protest against Mr. Sharif in the United States as the worsening state of human rights in Balochistan has recently gained a lot of international attention that has, nonetheless, led to a little policy review in Islamabad.
 A Letter From Punjab. Writing on Balochistan quake is a boring topic, why should I write on this? I have never been to Quetta even, have very few friends from the area, may be two or three people I know and that too on twitter. Perhaps that was the reason I had been postponing this task – an uphill task it seemed. I never wanted to write on Balochistan until yesterday when I was sitting in my office and was discussing politics and the usual news with my colleagues. Being in the news channel, one has to discuss politics in leisure time. It gives a good impression. One should discuss army, religion, secularism and other such things; things we don’t know a word about but we must give our detailed analysis to look cool.So we were talking about the earthquake and everyone was pretending that they feel sorry for the victims and the government must do its utmost to relocate and rehabilitate the people and etc etc.My boss joined in the conversation after a while. He didn’t bother giving his valued input but asked us to think about the topics for next week for our morning show. I suggested we do a detailed report on Balochistan earthquake and we should go to the area and see for ourselves what exactly had happened. He gave me a look (which I didn’t understand why) and mockingly said, “Why?” I was taken aback, what was this ‘why’ supposed to mean?My inner journalist, which was sleeping for quite a long time now, woke up and pushed me to start talking like an expert, which I obviously did, so I explained that there are over 500 casualties, thousands of houses had been partially or fully damaged and this is the need of the hour.He wasn’t really interested in knowing all this so he started playing cards on his laptop while I was trying to convince him. When I stopped talking, he smiled, looked at me and said in a mysterious voice, “Do you know that separatists over there kill their own people? They target international agencies like UN, WHO and they kill our army men.”I said maybe that’s true but they must have had a good reason to do all this, he said, “How many people have been killed over there, 300 or 500, so what?” I was shocked. I still tried my best and said that this will be something different, while all the other channels will be showing the same old stuff. It’s our chance to prove that we have something different as misery sells (this was the lowest I could think of to convince him). He seemed bored but said, “We need ratings and Balochistan with its hundreds of dead people is not worth selling. Instead of doing that we should make a report on October 8 earthquake and its survivors.” I was outraged and said that it’s been years now those people must have been rehabilitated to some extent, we should rather cover these Baloch victims.He had had enough, “How many times do I have to tell you that all of you will be fired if our show fails to get ratings. We are not interested in whatever is happening to Balochistan as people in Karachi don’t want to see that.”Most of the rating meters are located in Karachi and if Karachi residents don’t want to see a specific thing then media won’t cover it as it fails to give you ratings and that means you will end up with no ads and you will be kicked out.I wanted to give it one last try so I requested him to send me to Quetta along with the camera crew and I will spend money from my own pocket. He was infuriated, “What on earth am I telling you for the last half an hour? Why don’t you understand? Where is your brain if you have any? They will kill you and I don’t want you or any other member of my team to get killed, now off you go and make a list of the topics we are going to cover next week, make sure I have something juicy as it will boost our ratings.” And that was the end of our conversation and I was sure I won’t get increment now for I have asked for it.People of Balochistan think that Punjabis are biased and we have been depriving them of their basic rights. Punjabis are dictators; they produce less but consume almost all the resources of other provinces. Punjabis are ruling over the whole country. And in this hour, I admit, Punjabis are not helping the people of Balochistan. While over here in Punjab, people say that Baloch Sardars are wreaking havoc with the lives of their own people. I was told by a high level government official that a couple of years ago, millions of rupees were given to a Baloch Sardar for the development of his area and he brought a luxury car and expensive birds for his personal zoo.Many incidents of ethnic violence have been reported when Baloch killed Punjabis after seeing their ID cards while no such incident has ever happened/reported in Punjab. Baloch says its Punjabis who deprive them of education while its not true at all.When investigated, I came to know that over 50 students (who had no family member) have been brought to Lahore and they are getting free education in English medium schools, basic health & other facilities. On the other hand Baloch from their areas say that it’s a conspiracy against them as Punjabis are brain washing those children.When asked, those children say they don’t want to go back to their area.Blaming one party is useless. There are misunderstandings on both sides. We have seen that most of the MPs from Balochistan have literally done nothing for their people. They had been getting funds for their areas but where that money had gone? Do the people in their respective constituencies ask them? Or are they not allowed to ask anything like that?In the last Balochistan Assembly sessions, there was only one person in the opposition and he was the opposition leader (Yar Muhammad Rind), still the provincial government was unable to do any good for the people.I am not an expert on Balochistan and frankly speaking I don’t have any solution to this problem. All I wrote are the basic points, which people from both the sides highlight during any discussion. There are evil minds working at both sides who don’t want peace, there are mistakes committed by both sides; federal government and army have failed big time in addressing the grievances of the Baloch.I feel the solution could probably come about if people on both the sides would get to know each other and understand the problems they mutually face and this may help remove the misunderstandings. It is a wish which some may think is naïve others may think it is biased whatever it is thought of it comes from goodwill and concern for humanity in general. Hundreds of articles have been written on all this and as I have said I don’t have anything new to offer but do we really need something novel when even the oldest conflict resolution technique – simply talking to each other – hasn’t been tried.Why does dialogue have to follow a war not precede it? Can we, for once, try speaking to each other? Talks after all being peddled as a panacea for peace elsewhere in the country; can’t peace talks be given a chance in Balochistan?
Relief Delayed, Denied and Denounced. The relief operations in Awaran are continuously experiencing a set-back because of the unwillingness of the Frontier Corps (F.C.) and the Baloch Liberation Front (B.L.F.) to cooperate with each other. While the F.C. insists that all assistance among the earthquake survivors, including what is coming from the non-governmental organizations, should be distributed through its channels, the nationalists, on their part,  have clearly stated that they would not allow the Pakistan army to take control of any kind of relief distribution. The nationalists believe that the army would not only take the earthquake as an opportunity to increase its deployment in Awaran but it will also make an effort to ‘Pakistanize’ the local population by using the relief goods as an instrument of bribe. The B.L.F. has repeatedly called upon international organizations to operate in Balochistan but they refuse to offer similar assurances to the Pakistan Army and the F.C. The nationalists have somewhat emotionally blackmailed the local population asking them whether or not it was ethical to accept help from one’s enemy (the Pakistan army). The nationalists are imparting and inculcating lessons of self-respect/reliance, national honor, bravery and patriotism (toward the Baloch land) in an effort to convince the people that assistance coming from Pakistan is not worth submission to ‘occupying forces’.The people have begun to succumb to the nationalist approach and refused the army, F.C. assistance. A female survivor of the earthquake told the BBC News that Awaran was “Balochistan not Pakistan.” Another BBC reporter, while commenting on the response of the rest of Pakistan to the Balochistan earthquake, also observed that it seemed that Balochistan was totally disconnected from Pakistan.In a way, the nationalists have cashed public sentiments at a time when people urgently needed to be rescued from the remains of their homes soon after the earthquake. This was not sensible politics. For political reasons, a number of nationalist leaders have said they would accept assistance from anyone, including the ‘devil’, to get rid of Pakistan. One wonders then why they felt it was bad to accept assistance from the devil (read Islamabad) this time to save some precious human lives. Hence, the B.L.F. continues to disrupt relief operations that are spearheaded by the army. It has also snubbed Chief Minister Dr. Malik Baloch’s call for cooperation. In its worst attack on Wednesday, the B.L.F. killed two soldiers in a landmine blast in Mashky area of Awaran district.Having said that, the Pakistani media are only highlighting one side of the picture which discusses the attacks on the relief workers. But there is also insufficient reporting about the government’s own failure in arriving in the affected areas on time and begin timely relief operations. The army and the F.C., according to some analysts, are the root cause of escalation of tensions in Balochistan. Sending them to Balochistan after the earthquake, as noted by veteran journalist Rashed Rahman, amounts to adding salt to the Baloch injuries. Now that the rescue works have almost ended and the rehabilitation and reconstruction phase is commencing, the role of the F.C. and the army should be drastically minimized. The government should enhance the capacity of civilian institutions, such as the  National/ Provincial Disaster Management Authority to professionally grapple with the post-disaster situations.The federal and the provincial governments are not on the same page on the issue of international assistance. The Chief Minister, Malik Baloch, says there is a need for international support but Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has requested the masses to generously donate for the earthquake victims under a domestic relief fund.As a matter of fact, the Chief Minister is trying to please both sides i.e. the F.C. and the Baloch nationalists. On the one hand, he has emphasized the indispensability of F.C. in post-earthquake situation and, on the other hand, he has also echoed nationalist’s demand for international relief operations.The overall progress over recovery and normalization is extremely slow in Awaran. Reiterating our earlier recommendation for a ceasefire, we would once again urge the government and the nationalists to prioritize public needs over politics.Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif should take notice of increasing complaints against the F.C. and ensure the distribution of relief through civilian institutions. In addition, the government should immediately end the closure of Balochistan’s borders for international media and aid groups. Above all, Islamabad should stop treating Balochistan as an inaccessible colony. The government should respect the people who live there and address their pressing issues instead of treating the Baloch like untouchable animals. The people of Balochistan should be treated with respect as equal citizens and their civil rights should be protected.Once the government provides the international community access to Balochistan, the next immediate step should be to convene a donors’ conference to collect financial assistance for the reconstruction phase. While the earthquake was a nature disaster, the government’s failure to rehabilitate the Baloch will still have dire political consequences in the future. The government’s shortcomings will instinctively translate into support for the insurgent groups.
Sixteen Hanged After 14 Iranian Border Guards Die in Attack. TEHRAN: Iranian authorities on Saturday hanged 16 “rebels” following overnight clashes between alleged rebel groups and Iranian border forces in which 14 border guards were killed on the frontier with Pakistan, a judicial official said.“Sixteen rebels linked to groups hostile to the regime were hanged this morning in the prison of Zahedan in response to the death of border guards in Saravan,” Mohammad Marzieh, the attorney general of Sistan-Balochistan province, was quoted as saying by Fars news agency.“We warned the rebel groups that any attack targeting civilians or members of the security forces would not go unanswered,” he added.Earlier, Iran’s official news agency IRNA reported armed men killed 14 border guards in clashes Friday night in a mountainous region outside the southeastern town on the border with Pakistan.“Fourteen border guards were killed during armed clashes in the region of Saravan, and five others were wounded,” the agency quoted an informed source as saying, only identifying the gunmen as “bandits or rebels opposed to the Islamic republic”.Deputy Interior Minister Ali Abdollahi said that the guards had been killed during the ambush set by Iranians who were “members of hostile groups”.He claimed that “three soldiers have been taken hostage and taken to the other side of the border in Pakistan”.Saravan lies in the southeastern province of Sistan-Balochistan near the Pakistani border and is home to a large community of minority Sunni Muslims, unlike the rest of Shia-dominated Iran.The Sistan-Balochistan province has seen militants from the Sunni group Jundallah (Soldiers of God) launch bloody attacks in recent years.It was still unclear whether the attackers were drug smugglers or armed opposition groups.However, Iran’s Deputy Interior Minister Ali Abdollahi called on the Pakistani government to “take measures to control the border more seriously.”Pakistan’s charge d’affaires was received at the Iranian foreign ministry to receive an official demand that Islamabad “act firmly with officials and members of terrorist groups who have fled to Pakistani territory,” IRNA reported.Meanwhile, in a separate incident, officials said a Pakistani was killed and four others injured when Iranian border force personnel opened fire in Washap area on the Pakistan-Iran border.The apparently unrelated incident took place close to Taftan town on the Pakistani side of the border and around 100 kilometres from Zahedan, the main town in Iran’s Sistan province.A Levies paramilitary official, who requested customary anonymity, said five Pakistanis tried to illegally enter the Iranian side of Washap area this morning when border policemen opened fire on them.“Iranian border force opened fire when they crossed Pakistan’s border and entered the Iranian side of Washap area,” he said.The injured were rushed to a hospital in Taftan town for medical treatment. The Levies official said all injured Pakistanis had received bullet wounds.Security was tightened on both sides of the border soon after the incident.Iran is a major transit route for drugs that originate in Afghanistan and is trafficked across its territory, with much of it bound for Western countries.People smugglers also use the route to traffic illegal immigrants to Europe, via Iran and Turkey.The Islamic republic says it is fighting a deadly war against drug traffickers who make up half its prison population.But militant group Jundallah has also launched attacks on civilians and officials in Sistan-Balochistan, including a December 2010 suicide bombing in the city of Shabahar that killed 39 people.Iranian authorities hanged 11 suspected members of Jundallah at Zahedan prison in December 2010 in response to the deadly bombing of the Shia mourning procession in Shabahar.Jundallah, whose leader Abdolmalek Rigi was hanged in June 2010, has been waging a deadly insurgency in southeastern Iran for almost a decade.The group says it is fighting for the rights of the ethnic Sunni Balochis who make up a significant part of the Iranian province’s population.
Rail Services Disrupted: Six Dead as Insurgents Bomb Jaffar Express. QUETTA:  A passenger train derailed when a bomb tore through one of its wagons in the Nautal area of Nasirabad district of Balochistan on Monday, killing at least six people and injuring more than a dozen.The impact of the blast caused four other wagons of Jaffar Express to derail. Train service was suspended in the region as the blast destroyed part of the railway track.“It was a remote-controlled device and the target was Jaffar Express which was en route to Quetta from Rawalpindi,” Home Minister Sarfraz Bugti told a news conference.Local police officer Khan Muhammad confirmed the fatalities. “The victims included two brothers and a woman,” he told The Express Tribune by phone from Nasirabad. “The injured were driven to hospitals in Sibi and Dera Murad Jamali where a state of emergency was declared.”The outlawed Baloch Republican Army (BRA) claimed responsibility for the deadly attack. The group’s spokesperson told Quetta-based reporters by satellite phone that the train was carrying security personnel who were returning to Balochistan after spending Eidul Azha in Punjab.The deceased brothers were identified as Waseem and Naeem, residents of Sadiqabad, in Punjab, while the woman was a police constable, Sharifa Bibi.“The blast tore apart at least 30-foot portion of the railway track. While railways workers were sent to the area to repair the track, Rawalpindi-bound Jaffar Express, Lahore-bound Nawab Akbar Bugti Express and Karachi-bound Bolan Mail were stopped at Quetta railway station,” said a Pakistan Railways spokesperson, Abbas Ali.A special train was sent to the site to transport the passengers of the targeted train to Quetta.The head of Frontier Corps immediately flew to Dera Murad Jamali to visit the crime scene. “A team of doctors also travelled with the inspector general of FC,” a spokesperson for the paramilitary force said.Provincial Home Minister Sardar Sarfraz Bugti said the administration would take action against the perpetrators. “The government is trying to address the problems of Balochistan through dialogue – but it will take action against law breakers,” he added.The nature and quantity of the explosives used in the blast wasn’t immediately known. “We are investigating the incident,” Bugti added.Militants frequently target railway tracks and other government installations in Nasirabad division and Bugti Tribal Area where extraordinary security has been ordered. “The militants managed to evade security and plant the bomb on the railway track,” said Railways SP Chaudhry Riaz.In other violence, armed men set fire to a station of Balochistan Levies in the Dasht area of Kechi district on Monday. Over two dozen men carrying automatic weapons drove on motorcycles to Balochistan Levies station in Dasht Kudan on the edge of Turbat city and took the staff hostage at gunpoint.“They set fire to the station after looting official weapons from it,” a Levies official told The Express Tribune. Paramilitary troops and police reached the spot and mounted a manhunt for the attackers – but no detentions were made.
Bugti Murder Case: ATC Reissues Arrest Warrants. QUETTA: An anti-terrorism court (ATC) in Quetta Tuesday reissued arrest warrants against former prime minister Shaukat Aziz, former Balochistan governor Owais Ahmed Ghani and former District Coordination Officer (DCO) for Dera Bugti Abdul Samad Lasi in a case pertaining to the murder of Baloch nationalist leader Akbar Khan Bugti and ordered authorities to produce the accused persons at its next hearing on Nov 26, DawnNews reported.Former interior minister Aftab Ahmad Khan Sherpao and former provincial home minister Shoaib Nowsherwani appeared in the court during today’s hearing.Former military ruler General (retd) Pervez Musharraf, the main accused in the case, did not appear before the court. According to his counsel, Musharraf could not be produced in view of security threats to his life.Earlier on Oct 9, the Supreme Court had granted Musharraf bail in the Bugti murder case after accepting his appeal against rejection of a similar plea by the Balochistan High Court.Baloch nationalist leader Akbar Khan Bugti was killed in a cave on August 26, 2006 during a military crackdown ordered by Musharraf who was president and army chief at the time.Bugti had led an armed campaign to press for provincial autonomy and a greater share of profits from Balochistan’s natural resources. The death of the Baloch chieftain sparked angry protests in the country.
Jihadis in The Time of Earthquake. A number of religious organizations, including those known for their intrinsic connections with the jihadist groups, have infested Awaran, a district that was devastated by two powerful earthquakes in September. Apparently, these organizations are out there to carry out relief operations and assist the victims of the earthquake. But their presence has raised eyebrows given that the federal government is restricting credible, non-religious international humanitarian groups.The government does not specifically state why these groups have received official consent to operate in Awaran while their non-religious counterparts, both local and international, have been outright denied non-objection certificates (NOC) from the Ministry of Interior Affairs.At a time when sufficient assistance is not reaching the earthquake victims because of the mistrust that exists between security forces and the Baloch insurgents, religious groups are the only ones taking advantage of the situation. Their presence may temporarily help the local population but it will have long-term negative repercussions for the secular Baloch society. Jihadist groups take such occasions as an opportunity to exploit people’s plight. They use aid to win the hearts and minds of local communities.Dr. Hafeez-ur-Rehman (pictured in this article), the president of Al-Khidmat Foundation, which is connected with the Jammat-e-Islami, confirmed with the local media that at least 300 workers of his organization were currently busy in assisting earthquake survivors.  The B.B.C. Urdu also recently reported about the activities of religious groups known for their ties with jihadi organizations. Prominent among these organizations are Falah-e-Insaniat, Al-Rehmat Trust and Al-Khair Trust. While the Falah-e-Insaniat is closely associated with  Jamaat-ud-Dawa, the welfare wing of Lashkar-e-Taiba, B.B.C. also reported that some of the banners prominently displayed the name of Maulana Masood Azhar, the founder of Jaish-e-Mohammad, an Islamic extremist group that operates in Indian-administered Kashmir.The increasing presence of religious groups in Awaran also contradicts the official claims of security threats posed by Baloch insurgents. If the nationalists have even tolerated these religious groups to assist the masses despite clear ideological differences, there is no reason why they would attack international groups. Chief Minister Balochistan Dr. Malik Baloch has said at least three times that his province  needs international assistance to grapple with the aftermath of the earthquake. It is sad that the analysis of the provincial chief executive holds less weight and importance than some army officers and bureaucrats in Islamabad who are doing whatever it takes to keep the international community away from Balochistan.When an earthquake of lesser intensity hit Pakistan-administered Kashmir in 2005, the federal government immediately called for international help and engaged American helicopters for rescue operations. In Balochstan’s case, on the other hand, there is deafening silence. It is unfortunate how the country’s security establishment converts natural calamities into opportunities to patronize religious organizations. This time, the government is endeavoring to manipulate the people’s vulnerable situation. The long-term goal is to counter the Baloch nationalists with radical Islamists.Surprisingly, there has been too little opposition from the Baloch nationalists to the religious groups and their activities in Awaran.However, the nationalists have spoken more vocally against a fresh military operation in Awaran district. Even before the earthquake, the security forces conducted a massive operation in the area; whisked away several people to unknown locations and burnt people’s homes. In the latest operation, the forces besieged the house of Dr. Manan Baloch, secretary general of the Baloch National Movement (B.N.M.). According to a report published in Daily Intekhab, the forces also arrested Dr. Baloch’s ten-year old son and many relatives in Gajjar locality in Awaran District.Mohammad Ejaz shahid, the Inspector General of the Frontier Corps (F.C.), congratulated his forces over the “successful operation against anti-state elements” and ordered them to take “indiscriminate action” against them wherever the forces found them.Yet, the Pakistan army, on October 20th, issued a statement through its media wing, the Inter-Services Public Relations (I.S.P.R.), saying that the army was not carrying out any military operations in Awaran and Mushke. The statement acknowledged the presence of forces in the district but insisted that they were there “only for relief operations”. The army says 6 of its soldiers have been killed and 12 injured while carrying out relief operations. The army, according to the I.S.P.R. statement, “has exercised utmost restraint…despite repeated attacks by miscreants on troops busy in relief work.”The statement further added, “there is no Military Operation in Awaran and Mushke as being propagated by miscreants. DG [Director General] ISPR also appealed to the general public, to beware of miscreant’s propaganda.”In some parts of the world, natural disasters provide an opportunity for rival groups to temporarily give up their differences and work with each other in the greater interest of the people in need. This newspaper had previously called for an immediate ceasefire between the government and the insurgents.We wish the earthquake in Balochistan were not used to further deepen and complicate the already existing crisis. Populating Awaran with jihadists and conducting anew military operations will only multiply the challenges Balochistan already faces. It is futile to expect the government or the army to monitor the activities of the Jihadi groups operating in Balochistan since the state itself is in bed with these elements. The religious groups are responsible for causing more pain to our society than mitigating people’s suffering.
Long March For Baloch Missing Persons Begins. QUETTA: The Voice for Baloch Missing Persons (VBMP) launched a long march from Quetta to Karachi to press the authorities for recovery of missing Baloch political workers on Sunday evening.Chairman VBMP, Nasrullah Baloch and Mama Qadeer Baloch led the long march participants from Quetta. Besides men, women and children were also part of the march in a frustrated attempt for recovery of their loved ones.“Current rulers have intensified the kill and dump policy in Balochistan,” Nasrullah Baloch told reporters prior to launching of the march.Emotionally charged protesters carried placards and banners inscribed with slogans, “stop killing Baloch political workers” and “we condemn extra-judicial killings” during the long march.“We want recovery of our loved ones,” Baloch demanded. The VBMP claimed that intelligence agencies have picked up a large number of Baloch political workers to suppress their voice.However, officials contradict the claims and assert that the number of missing persons was less as compared to the claims of VBMP.“We have been protesting for the last five years for recovery of loved ones,” Mama Qadeer Baloch lamented and complained that the authorities were not even implementing court orders.Participants of the long march will be traveling during the day from Quetta to Karachi. Family members of missing persons from other districts would also join the long march on their way to Karachi.Qadeer Baloch said under a pre-planned conspiracy mutilated dead bodies of Baloch missing political workers were being dumped in Sarjani town area of Karachi. He said scores of Baloch political workers have been picked up during present government.Chief Minister Balochistan, Dr. Malik Baloch has repeatedly asserted that his government was committed to bring an end to recovery of mutilated dead bodies in the province.Dr. Baloch has also announced to convene a multi-party conference to discuss ways and means to bring an end to prevailing unrest in Balochistan, plagued by an insurgency and growing sectarian attacks.However, Baloch resistance groups have rejected talks with Dr. Baloch’s government and termed it a conspiracy to damage the Baloch struggle.
No Eid For Baloch. No-eid. Unlike most of Pakistan, the Baloch mourned on the Eid-ul-Azha, on two accounts.First, the Voice For Missing Baloch Persons, an organization comprising of the family members of the ‘missing persons’, took out a rally in Quetta to highlight the unresolved issue of the enforced disappearances in the province. Abdul Qadir Baloch, popularly known as Mama Qadir, who is the vice chairman of the organization, said it was the 8th consecutive eid that his organization was mourning on the eid day. Each year, the relatives of the missing persons gather to remember their loved ones and call for justice. While the issue of  missing persons began as early as 2002, three governments have utterly failed one after the other to end this illegal practice. Some sources even point out that the security forces and intelligence agencies have even started to whisk away people from the earthquake parts of the province. This is a deeply alarming development.Second, Awaran district presented a very gloomy look as people remembered hundreds of their family members, relatives and neighbors who had lost their lives during last month’s powerful earthquake. The loss of precious lives is one, but not the sole, reason for the local communities to sit mournfully. The main reason for the widespread despondency and frustration is the government’s inability or unwillingness to dispatch relief to the quake victims. Awaran, the worst-hit area, has virtually become a region faced with an unattended humanitarian crisis. The Pakistani government has intentionally shut down all doors for international groups to reach out to the people of Awaran while the media have totally deflected attention from the deepening crisis.What the Pakistani authorities are currently doing with the Baloch masses will not go down in the history on a positive note . The Baloch will neither forget how the government prevented the international community from reaching out to the people in urgent need of help nor will they ever forgive Islamabad for playing politics at such a critical juncture.The proponents of the federal government insist that the provincial government, after the passage of the 18th amendment, should no longer depend on Islamabad for improving the conditions in the province. This is an unrealistic expectation considering that the federal government, including the Pakistan army and the intelligence agencies, have much to account for the issue of enforced disappearances and blocking assistance to Balochistan’s quake-victims. The primary onus lies with the federal government to end the sufferings of the Baloch people by changing its discriminatory attitude and biased policies toward the country’s poorest province under the pretext of the so-called ‘national security’.
Pakistan: No Man’s Country. When Washington DC is sleeping, half of the world is awake and when morning appears here many countries, including Pakistan, are concluding their day. So when you wake up in the morning and check your phone and social media then you get updated about what was happening around the globe while you were asleep. When I got up in the morning, I got the horrible news on both regular and social media. The more I studied, the more pain I felt.The biggest optimism for any person is the belief that the future will be better than the present. And as a Pakistani, every time I think that now the country’s situation cannot get worse and may be now it will recuperate but one after one every blatant act of terrorism is making this a shallow and rusty hope.As the Pakistani government was weighing its options to tackle the Taliban and their affiliates, indulged in a debate of good and bad Taliban, at the same time those outfits were planning the suicide attacks at a church in Peshawar. More than 80 innocent Pakistani citizens perished in these atrocious attacks. The sense of loss over this grizzly massacre is quite natural yet some political circles cling to the idea of opening dialogue with the Taliban. The agenda of these political circles is no different from those Taliban who want to convert Pakistan into a sect-minority-free “Islamic State”.Extremist Taliban factors and their sympathizers in political parties, in a bid to enforce self-style version of Islam over Pakistan, are transforming it into a land where inhabitation of humans will be impossible. In current situation the terrified minorities and secular groups are already forced to leave their houses. After target killings of Hazara people in Balochistan, thousands of citizens are seeking shelter in other parts of the country. Several people are moving to other countries because of Shia genocide in the country.The Ahmadiyya community, which has already taken the brunt of sectarian hatred, is once again on the hit-list. Hunting of Ahmadiyya community had started right after the very creation of Pakistan. Yet, in 1973, their persecution was legalized by declaring them non-Muslims in the constitution.The “Islamisation” that started during Zia-ul-Haq’s era in 1980s not only failed miserably but such efforts also gave birth to such monsters who have changed the whole country into a haunted place.The requirement of the new era is to avoid transforming Pakistan into some ideology or religion and just make it a secular country which is suitable for a common human being to live in. We should strive to make our country a place where all human beings have basic rights and there is no human rights violation in the name of religion.
Closed Cases, Open Wounds. On October 21, the Strasbourg-based European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), in the Inés del Río Prada detention case, found Spain guilty of breach of convention, and termed its ‘Parot doctrine’ illegal. Prada, sentenced to 3,828 years in jail in 1987, was denied release in 2008 under the Parot doctrine. It was adopted by Spain’s Supreme Court in 2006 to restrict ‘Euskadi Ta Askatasuna’ (ETA), i.e. Basque Homeland and Freedom prisoners’ entitlement to early release and other benefits. It is named after Unai Parot, a convicted ETA member, who was the first to see his prison penalty extended. This doctrine ensures that the remission for work done in prison is deducted from the total sentence, rather than the Spanish law’s 30-year limit.Spain seems to be good at denial of justice; crimes committed during the civil war and Francisco Franco’s 38-year rule have amnesty. Despite the UN calls, Spain resists probes into the crimes against humanity during that period. These crimes have immunity under the amnesty approved by parliament in 1977, which was agreed to by all Spanish political parties, and termed as the ‘Pact of Forgetting’. During the said period, the number of forced disappearances totalled at least 114,000, and some 30,000 babies and toddlers were stolen from their parents. An Amnesty International report, “Closed Cases, Open Wounds” said that it has created an unfortunate situation whereby victims have been abandoned by the justice system.According to Emilio Silva, who heads the Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory, which spearheads efforts to help people find the remains of relatives who went missing during the Spanish civil war, in the last 13 years, 2,500 of the 6,300 bodies exhumed from mass graves have been identified. Unable to seek justice in Spain because of the amnesty, some 50 Spaniards, who say four policemen tortured them or their families during the Franco era, have brought charges against them in Argentina for crimes against humanity under the principle of the doctrine of ‘universal jurisdiction’, which allows courts to try cases of human rights abuses committed elsewhere.In Balochistan, it is not that different either. The protest by the Voice of Baloch Missing Persons (VBMP), led by Nasrullah Bangulzai and Mama Qadeer Baloch, for the recovery of nearly 14,000 persons, and justice for 700 plus abducted, tortured and killed Baloch activists continues. This 1,315-day old protest remains largely unnoticed; perhaps Baloch miseries are too remote for many to garner sympathy. A VBMP protest march is planned from Quetta to Karachi, but it too will receive scant attention, even from civil society, which, by and large, shuns the Baloch issues. Apparently, the Baloch missing persons and mutilated bodies too seem to be ignored under an undeclared tacit ‘pact of forgetting’ here.However, it is not only the missing persons and the victims of the systematic dirty war who are ignored and forgotten; the victims of Awaran’s last month’s earthquake too have failed to get the attention that any disaster-affected people would naturally deserve. The situation is one of sheer hopelessness and despair, but the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) smugly announced a week ago that the relief work had been completed. It is a month since the deadly Balochistan earthquake, and the UN’s Food Security Cluster (FSC) has cautioned in a report that another disaster is in the making, as the majority of the Awaran earthquake survivors are facing an acute food shortage, which is set to intensify as their existing sources dry up and cold weather sets in. Needless to say, the earthquake destroyed not only houses but also the possibility of economic activities that brought money, and in turn, food for families. The three most important sources of livelihood and economic dependence of households in Awaran are as follows: agriculture 39 percent, daily wage labour 26 percent and livestock 22 percent. Daily labour is the most affected area, with a reported loss of income of 48 percent, followed by livestock 20 percent and agriculture 13 percent.This FSC report also says: “About 46 percent of the households in the areas covered by the assessment reportedly do not have any food stock at all, whereas another 45 percent have food stocks lasting no more than a week. This implies that more than 90 percent of the population is in need of immediate food assistance.” Moreover, less than 10 percent of the households have enough money to buy food, and more than 85 percent of the key informants termed markets as inaccessible or non-functional/destroyed. The key informants of this survey were males so the condition and needs of women and children, who are most vulnerable and suffer the most in disasters, remain unidentified.This situation spells an unparallelled catastrophe for the quake-affected people, and yet Pakistan continues to deny permission to international organisations to help them. The express purpose of barring international aid seems to be to deny people any return to normality of livelihood means, to keep them on the fringe of starvation so they may desist from supporting the Sarmachars (insurgents). The aim seems to be to keep lives wrecked, already destroyed by the earthquake. This denial of aid to the earthquake-affected people is a brazen crime against humanity. However, absence of protests proves that there is an undeclared ‘Pact of Forgetting’ injustice to the Baloch here.Incidentally, Pakistan does not need a Parot doctrine in Balochistan; it did not in Bangladesh either, because it meticulously enforces the doctrine of ‘dirty war’. The Baloch are picked up and later found dead, because the courts here excel at making a mockery of justice. They issue a week’s ultimatum, and as years lapse, nothing happens. Moreover, there is no ECtHR to challenge these atrocities. Consequently, apart from Balochistan, extrajudicial killings have also been rife in Sindh, Swat, Dir, Mohmand Agency and Bajaur.Though the real solution will however come when the Baloch get their rights, yet it surprises and saddens me that in spite of decades of atrocities and brutalities perpetrated against the Baloch people, the large Baloch Diaspora has never even contemplated using the principle of ‘universal jurisdiction’ to their advantage. They should now make a concerted effort to bring the perpetrators of atrocities against the Baloch to book, or at least, secure the much deserved international reprobation and opprobrium for them. The action against the Bengalis, and now the Baloch proves that, like Spain, the enduring situation of victims of atrocities being abandoned by the justice system here will be institutionalized, and unless people resist the injustices and atrocities against the Baloch, they will be the next victims.
Why Pakistanis Are Talking About Salman Rushdie Again. Salman Rushdie and his controversial 1988 novel The Satanic Verses have ignited a series of fresh zealous discussions in Pakistan, a country known for its love for conspiracy theories and controversies. We vividly remember books, such as The Satanic Verses and movies likeThe Innocence of Muslims that sparked violent protests in Pakistan, as well as in many other Islamic countries, where the Muslims insisted that the book and the movie had separately insulted Prophet Muhammad.Pakistan’s stringent blasphemy laws recommend the death sentence for anyone who insults Muhammad.While Rushdie may not even know what he has actually done this time to outrage that Muslim-majority country’s conservative commentators, Malala Yousafzai, the teenage campaigner for girls’ education, has indeed landed in hot water for even mentioning The Satanic Verses only once in her recently released autobiography I Am Malala.Yousafazi, 16, was shot last year by the Pakistani Taliban for transgressing their restrictions in Swat valley on girls’ education. She openly campaigned for the reconstruction and reopening of more than 400 schools destroyed and closed down by the Taliban.The right-wing commentators are manipulating a portion of Malala’s book in which she had described her father, Ziauddin Yousafzai, as a strong believer in freedom of expression in the context of anti-Rushdie protests that erupted in Pakistan. Her father had implored fellow Muslims to respond to Rushdie’s “anti-Islamic” book with a better pro-Islamic account instead of protesting violently.“My father also saw the book [Satanic Verses] as offensive to Islam but believes strongly in freedom of speech,” wrote Malala in her book and quoted her father as saying, “Is Islam such a weak religion that it cannot tolerate a book written against it? Not my Islam!”I Am Malala is not only the autobiography of a courageous girl who was shot by the Taliban but it is an exposé of the Pakistani state’s deep-rooted connections with radical Islamists and social fault lines that lead to discrimination against women. The book tells the story a Pashtun girl who is profoundly perturbed by increasing radicalization of the Pakistani society which consequently curtails women’s freedoms and access to education. She explains how a young generation of Pakistanis is deeply disconnected from the rest of the world because their biased text books distort history and glorify wars in the name of Islam.Malala offers her unconventionally candid opinion and criticism on several issues which are still deemed as taboo for public debate in Pakistan. By discussing her country’s internal policy failures and the army’s tolerance, encouragement and protection for the Jihadist elements, Malala has alarmed the nexus between the mullah (clergy) and the military in her country.Ironically, books that often generate public reaction in countries like Pakistan are the ones that have even not been read by those who condemn the publication. This time, most Pakistanis have also not read I Am Malala for two reasons. Firstly, a significant majority of Pakistanis simply cannot read English. Secondly, the Pakistani Taliban have warnedbookshops not to sell copies of the book. Hence, this has made conservative commentators’ job easier to spread disinformation among the masses in a country with millions of illiterate but religiously passionate citizens.The campaign in Pakistan against I Am Malala is spearheaded by Orya Maqbool Jan, a conservative columnist for an Urdu language newspaper; Ansar Abbasi, a journalist infamous for his orthodox religious views and rigid anti-American views and Syed Talat Hussain, a nationalist broadcast journalist.On October 21, Mr. Jan, while writing in his article “Malala and her promoters” in Dunya newspaper, was the first columnist from the mainstream media to denounce Malala’s book on the charges that it had defamed Islam and Pakistan.“If you read excerpts from the book,” he wrote, “you will wonder who has put such abusive words in this 16-year-old girl’s mouth against my religion, Pakistan and its people. The first person she has mentioned [in the book] is Salman Rushdie, who used disgusting language against our Prophet Muhammad, his wives and his family.”Malala had blamed an unknown cleric allegedly linked with Pakistan’s intelligence agencies for instigating anti-Rushdie protests in Pakistan in 1988 while Mr. Jan, the columnist, described it “the worst lie of the history.”Unlike their English counterparts, the Urdu media have phenomenal accesses to and influence over millions of Pakistani readers and viewers.On October 24, Jang, Pakistan’s most circulated Urdu newspaper, published a provocative column by Ansar Abbasi, who heads the newspaper’s investigative team.In his article, “Is it the same Malala?”, Abbasi said he wished Malala had not written the book because it had hurt the feelings of the Muslims.“Describing the Satanic Verses as an issue of freedom of expression is one such topic that has caused tensions between Muslims and the non-Muslims… we curse upon such freedom of expression that ridicules our Prophet,” he wrote.Mr. Abbasi published a follow-up column in the same newspaper on October 28 wondering why the Pakistani media did not expose the “anti-Islam” portions of Malala’s book. He insisted that the media should openly debate why it was wrong for Malala to say her father believed in Rushdie’s right to free expression.In both of his articles, Mr. Abbasi has questioned Malala’s commitment to Prophet Muhammad and Islam as he absurdly whines that the teenage girl did not use “Peace Be Upon Him” or (P.B.U.H.) each time she mentioned Prophet Muhammad in her book in order to show respect for Muhammad.The debate over I Am Malala is gradually shifting from newspapers to news channels. On October 26, Mr. Jan and Abbasi, both critics of Malala, bullied Pervez Hoodbhoy, a prominent liberal intellectual, so much that he had to quit the live show.I Am Malala provides the Pakistanis another opportunity for self-reflection. Malala did bravely survive the Taliban assault and managed to escape from her country in in the wake of a Taliban warning to target her once again if she returns to Pakistan. However, her battle is not over. Now, she has been pushed into totally different, or even unpleasant, media warfare against the pro-Taliban writers.Few writers, such as Khaperai Yousafzai, a columnist for The Baloch Hal, have rebutted the conservative propaganda against the teenage girl in what she billed as right-wing’s “Malala-phobia”.“This is very typical of writers like Orya Maqbool Jan to manipulate public sentiments in the name of religion,” she wrote in her article on October 22, “they attack a women’s character or accuse her of being anti-Islamic when they actually fail to support their arguments with facts and logic.”World governments, writers and intellectuals must not leave Malala in lurch. They have to stand by her side as the pro-Taliban media in Pakistan seems to be intentionally preparing a very dangerous blasphemous case against Malala which could potentially jeopardize her safety, even in the United Kingdom where she currently lives.
The Balochistan Earthquake awaran. Express Tribune Editorial Pakistan is prey to a range of natural disasters that can inflict dreadful wounds and do so with an almost predictable regularity. Whilst the disasters associated with weather — flooding and wind damage — are in large part predictable and annually cyclic, earthquakes are not. The surface of the earth is made up of tectonic plates that are dynamic, in motion, and it is their movements that cause the kind of devastation that has been wrought in Balochistan and so nearly brought catastrophe to our major cities. The only thing that can with certainty be predicted about earthquakes is that they will happen, but no earthquake-prone nation on Earth has yet successfully been able to devise a system that tells us the ‘when and where’. Pakistan is bisected by several active fault lines, and the zone between Quetta and Kalat is one where the possibility of earthquakes is high.The September 24 earthquake that occurred in Balochistan, registered 7.7 on the Richter scale (making it more severe than the one that hit Kashmir in 2005) and has killed at least 250 people with another 350 injured — both numbers are expected to rise as aid and relief workers reach the more remote areas. Furthermore, several aftershocks have been recorded, including one that measured 5.9. The area may be thinly populated but where there are concentrations of habitation they are densely packed, often living in fragile mud-brick houses that offer little or no protection in the event of an earthquake. Distances between population centres in Balochistan are long, the roads are indifferently maintained and will anyway have been damaged. Helicopters are being used both to collect evidence of damage and deliver emergency goods to areas that in some cases have been literally flattened.The chief minister of Balochistan has declared an emergency in Awaran, where 80 per cent of houses are reported destroyed, and placed 30 districts of the province on “high alert.” Earthquakes take a long time to recover from in undeveloped regions and previous experience of earthquakes in Pakistan suggests that the recovery phase is bedevilled with inefficiency and corruption, compounding the misery of those affected. Add in the internal unrest in Balochistan and it is easy to posit a scenario that stretches years into the future. There are still people living in temporary shelters as a result of the 2005 earthquake, and it may be another decade before the affected area sees a return to ‘normal’.There are anecdotal reports of residual anger in the province at the slowness of government response to previous natural disasters and this event must not provide yet another reason for the people of Balochistan to add another black mark to their long list of grievances. That said, it is going to be difficult logistically to get help to the most needy and it is a virtual certainty that there will be people that succumb to their injuries because help did not arrive soon enough. The armed forces are best equipped to provide ‘first response’ but it will be for the civil administration to do the rebuild and repair work — and not just of habitation, as there will be thousands that are physically disabled by the earthquake. Planning for their future needs to begin now, not 10 years down the line. Perhaps if some of the budget given to defence could be directed to strengthening relief and rehabilitation efforts we could have a more adequate civilian response structure in place to deal with such disasters.The medical and social-sector infrastructure of Balochistan was deficient before this, and will have been locally degraded to the point of extinction in the worst affected areas. Rebuilding schools, hospitals and rural health centres takes time, money and most importantly political motivation. The province is poor to start with and has few infrastructure resources of its own. The federal government of which there were such high hopes, including the still-unfulfilled hope of dialogue with Baloch separatists, appears to be increasingly paralysed by the events that surround it. There is almost as much media interest in the emergence of a small island, a consequence of the earthquake, off the coast near to the port of Gwadar; but what really matters is getting help, and fast, to the poorest and most disadvantaged.
Brahumdagh Bugti Discusses Balochistan at Geneva Press Club. GENEVA: Baloch Republican Party’s central leadership addressed International media in a press conference in Geneva Press Club.The head of the Baloch Republican Party Nawab Brahumdagh Khan Bugti, vice president Advocate Anwar Baloch, central spokesman Sher Mohammad Bugti, Masood Sardarzai and the President of BRP UK chapter Mansoor Baloch were present at the press conference.Following is the Speech of Nawab Brahumdagh Bugti.First of all, I would like to thank all of you for being here to listen to the pain of Baloch people and under the deteriorating situation of Balochistan. I really appreciate your kind presence.Balochistan is geographically located in a strategic location as it borders Afghanistan and Iran in the west, Pakistani province of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa and Punjab in the north, Sindh in the east and arabian sea in the south. Balochistan covers the 44 percent of Pakistan in geographically but only 5 percent in terms of population. Balochistan is rich in mineral resources and natural wealth such as oil, gas, copper, gold, granite, marble, coal to name but only a few. All these specifications have become a threat to the lives of the Baloch people instead of bringing peace and prosperity to their lives as the state have resorted to worst kind of violence against the ordinary people to suppress their birth rights. We are here to inform the international community about the deadly situation in Balochistan. Baloch people are suffering the worst kind of human rights violations under the forceful Pakistani rule in Balochistan since 1948. Military operations, enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings have become a matter of daily life. No day passes without a military offensive; someone being abducted or a bullet-riddled dead body being found.The state have imposed different forms of violation in Balochistan including state terrorism and religious extremism. We condemn religious extremism in the region and especially in Balochistan. As it has already became an open secret that Pakistan is the only exploiter of terrorism in the whole region and that it is financially supporting the Jihadist groups who are destabilizing the entire region. The bloodshed of the Shia minoriy in Balochistan can not be justified at any cost. Pakistan Army’s armed proxy groups are behind such barbaric actions to confuse the world regarding Balochistan Liberation Movement. Pakistan is the factory of terrorists and spreading them to worldwide.Baloch people strongly oppose Chinese intervention in Balochistan. Iran-Pakistan gas pipeline project and China’s involvement in Gwadar port are against the Baloch will and we do not accept them. We consider China and Iran as crime partners of Pakistan in Balochistan.China has been actively involved in the loot and plunder of the natural resources of Balochistan since past many years. It has been playing a criminal part in looting resources from Sui, Saindak, Rekodic and other parts of the Baloch homeland. China is exploring the Sui, Dera Bugti areas for more oil and gas reserves where major military offensives are carried out by Pakistan army against the innocent civilian populace of the area to compel them to migrate from the area and pave the way for the plunder of the natural resources. Planting landmines have become a routine exercise of the Pakistani forces and their proxies in the areas of Dera Bugti that killed hundreds of innocents including women and children. They also torch the houses of innocent Baloch after looting them & pollute the sources of drinking water such as lakes and wells with deadly poison and force the inhabitants to migrate from the area.It is the fifth major military operation underway in Balochistan and they have claimed hundreds of thousands of lives of innocent Baloch people and more than 500,000 have migrated from their ancestral areas to other parts of Balochistan, Sindh, Punjab and more than 10,000 have even migrated to Afghanistan because of the threat to their lives from the state.Some parts of Balochistan such as Dera Bugti, Kohistan Marri, Mashkay, Mastung, Punjgor and others have been made no-go zones and these areas are under continuous assaults of forces where they indiscriminately target the innocent Baloch civilians populace and bomb their houses.On March 17th 2005 Pakistan Army killed 80 people in a carpet bombardment over Dera Bugti city where majority of the victims were women and children. Prominent Baloch Leader and My Grandfather was the main target of the Pakistani state forces but fortunately he survived in the attack. He was demanding the basic rights for the people of Balochistan and he had politically struggled for years to draw attention of the civilized world towards Balochistan but he was forced by the state to leave his hometown. He went to the mountains along with hundreds of his comrades and stood to defend the right of his people.Shaheed Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti was martyred along with 32 of his tribesmen by the Pakistani Army in a gory operation on August 26th 2006 in Tratani region between Dera Bugti and Kohlu. Fighter jet and chemical weapons were used against the aged Baloch leader.Enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings in Balochistan are one of the worst in the entire world. More than 15,000 political activists, students, teachers, lawyers, intellectuals hence people from all walks of life have been abducted by Pakistani state forces and secret agencies within past one decade. 800 plus bullet-riddled dead bodies of those abducted have been found so far while both the list of victims of enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings is rising very fast.Prominent Human Rights organizations like Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have repeatedly documented the state atrocities and human rights violations committed by Pakistani forces in Balochistan but nothing has been done to help stop those abuses except mere lip service and paperwork. Unfortunately, the international community have turned a blind eye and deaf ears to this human tragedy in Balochistan. International media has limited itself to the state narration and it doesn’t try to gain access to explore and report the real situation. We demand to the United Nation to immediately take action to end the sufferings of Baloch nation. We urge the international community to step forward and support the just and lawful struggle of the Baloch people for their birth rights including the right to self-rule and the right to self-determination.
Balochistan’s Earthquake And The Overjoyed Electronic Media. Ever since its annexation into Pakistan, Balochistan has always been in the news mainly for abominable reason. Unending socio economic plight, missing person saga, kill and dump operation, ethnic killing and sectarian violence are a few tips of the iceberg which more often than not throw Balochistan into the limelight. On Tuesday, the province was once again back in the news when a major portion of the impoverished district Awaran and some parts of the Kech district were jolted by a catastrophic earthquake of 7.7 magnitude.And then it was a matter of few seconds. The fragile mud-brick houses where life was blossoming a while earlier were turned into rubble. Laughters were replaced by screams and smiles were taken over by tears. Dream seeking eyes were shut down for ever. The battle of life was almost over for the poor inhabitants of Awaran and Dandaar. And as usual it was death that proved itself the ultimate winner; the winner whose victory is always mourned rather celebrated.In that mournful evening hardly any other topic was discussed. People from different corners of the country and gulf were worried about wellbeing of their loved ones and were busy in trying to contact them. As has always been the case under such circumstances, all TV channels interrupted their routine telecasts and all the evening long didn’t spare a moment to keep people posted about the death toll which was precipitously increasing and so was the intensity of grief and shock. In the midst of this tragic episode of death and destruction late in the evening the emergence of a new island off the Gwadar coast was reported. By the next morning, the newly emerged island had staggeringly managed to divert the attention of the news anchors from the irreparable havoc wrought by the massive quake. The anchors and media persons who few hours earlier were expressing their grief over the destruction, were now overjoyed with the newly popped up island. They exultantly began to translate it as a new gift from the Nature. From then on, it has been the 76 meter long island painfully overshadowing the destruction that spanned over 20000 sq. km. Reported emanation of Methane gas from the island caused further mirth and merriment amongst the anchors of this energy starved country.Instead of working out an effective mechanism for rescue and rehabilitation, experts were invited to the news studios and future of the tiny island was enthusiastically discussed. Even after knowing the fact that such phenomenon are quite common in the wake of such calamities and are bound to erode after a certain period, the clouds of excitement and jubilation appeared reluctant to fade away. Amid this humanitarian crisis, the obsession of the electronic media with a small island depicts that Balochistan is not more than a piece of resourceful land for many in this country. For them it is a goose that always lays golden eggs. They are merely concerned with the golden eggs and what befalls the goose is not their business. Perhaps Atta Shad has composed the following befitting couplet with such a crisis in the mind:Keh jab zameen hi sail-e-bala ki zad mein hoTo phir samar ki nahein phir shajar ki sochte hainFurthermore, in this hour of grief and gloom when scores of people still lie buried under the piles of rubble and those who survived are without food and shelter under the open sky, media needs not to be concerned whether the TTP be allowed to open an office in Pakistan or not. It is not the time to discuss trivialities and faux pas. Rather it is time to heal the wounds; it is time to share the sorrows of grief stricken people of Balochistan who have always been at the respective end of an unjust socio-economic system. Above all, it is time to turn the rubble into houses again. We have enough time in the future for celebration and merriment.
Fund for Balochistan Earthquake Victims Established. WASHINGTON, DC: The Baloch community in the United States has set-up a website to generate funds and donations for the victims of last week’s Balochistan earthquake that devastated the district of Awaran killing more than 500 people.Called as the Fund for Balochistan Earthquake Victims, the website can be accessed on balochistanearthquakefund.orgThe organizers have also created a virtual online Facebook event, which can be accessed at The online platform is administered by a group of young  professionals based in the United States who have appealed to the people across the globe to help the Baloch earthquake victims as they urgently need drinking water, food, medicine, medical treatment, tents and other stuff in order to grapple with the tragedy. They have also welcomed people who are interested to volunteer in collecting donations.
Another Quake Jolts Shattered Balochistan District. QUETTA: Seven people were killed Saturday when a 6.8-magnitude earthquake struck Balochistan province in a region already devastated by a massive quake earlier this week, said a spokesman for the Balochistan government.The most recent deaths bring the total toll from the two quakes to 366.According to the US Geological Survery, the epicentre of the quake was recorded at 96 kilometres northeast of Balochistan’s Awaran district and 14 kilometres deep.The local meteorological office recorded the intensity of the earthquake at 7.2 on the Richter scale and said the epicentre of the quake was 150 kilometres southwest of Khuzdar.Deputy Commissioner in Awaran, Rasheed Baloch said the seven people were killed Saturday in Nok Jo, a small village in Awaran with a population of around 15,000.He said more than sixty mud-walled houses collapsed when the earthquake struck the village. He said said four bodies from the quake earlier in the week were also retrieved from the rubble.Baloch said a rescue operation was underway in the district and its surrounding areas to retrieve the bodies and shift the injured to hospitals. “Poor communication system is a major hindrance in the way of relief operation,” he said.Strong tremors were felt in different parts of the province.People panicked and came out of their homes in Quetta, the provincial capital. “I was sitting in my office when the earthquake struck,” said Nazeer Ahmed, a provincial government official in Quetta.The Balochistan Assembly session was underway when the earthquake struck. Television footage showed ministers and members of the assembly walking out of the session due to the tremors as the session was hurriedly suspended.Aftershocks were felt in Kech, Khuzdar, Kalat and other towns of the province.The tremors were also felt in Naushero Feroz, Shikarpur, Karachi and Hyderabad areas of Sindh province.Meanwhile, the death toll from a 7.7-magnitude earthquake which jolted the same area earlier on Tuesday rose to 359 on Friday with over 600 people injured. The September 24 quake had struck Balochistan’s Awaran and Kech districts and relief work was continuing in the area.Patients undergoing treatment at the Awaran district hospital also came out of hospital wards after the tremors. “More than one hundred injured are now outside Awaran hospital,” Muhammad Tariq, a local journalist said.
Prime Minister to Announce Special Package For Balochistan Quake Victims: Shahbaz. QUETTA: Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif would announce a special package for earthquake affectees of Balochistan after his return from the US, Punjab Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif stated on Friday.Shahbaz, who reviewed the ongoing relief efforts in quake-hit areas of Balochistan along with Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, held out assurances of complete support on part of Punjab province to the quake-affected people in this ‘hard time’.The federal and Punjab governments, the chief minister said, would not leave the people of Balochistan alone and take all steps for their relief and restoration.He said the main purpose of his visit to Awaran district was to express solidarity and sympathy with the people of Balochistan. He also said the entire Pakistani nation shared their grief.Balochistan Chief Minister Abdul Malik Baloch and Senator Hasil Bizenjo were also present on the occasion.Interacting with newsmen after his visit to district headquarters hospital to inquire after those injured in the 7.8 magnitude quake, the Punjab chief minister promised every possible support to the Balochistan government to cope with this situation.He said his government in Punjab province would not sit calm until rehabilitation of all the people affected by the calamity. The quake-hit people would be given tents, food, water and other necessary items, he added.The chief minister told media that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had contacted him from New York over telephone and asked for extending every sort of assistance to the quake-hit people. He said a special cabinet committee had been formed at the federal level that would monitor the relief and rescue activities.He said federal ministers Abdul Qadir Baloch and Jam Kamal were present in the area and that through their and provincial government’s coordination provision of all necessary relief goods and rehabilitation work would be made possible.Shahbaz said the entire nation stood by the earthquake affectees and till rehabilitation of last affected Baloch they would not sit calm. “The prime minister would announce a special package for the affected people after his return to the country,” he added.Shahbaz said the first consignment of relief goods, comprising 15,000 tents, food items, water and medicines, from the Punjab government had reached Karachi and would be carried to the affected areas of Balochistan. He also announced Rs100 million for the earthquake affectees on part of the Punjab government.Speaking on the occasion, Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar said Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was being updated on the current situation of relief activities and in accordance with his directives, all steps were being taken for rescue and relief of the affected people. He announced that the affected people would be given compensation.Meanwhile, Sindh Chief Minister Qaim Ali and Opposition Leader in National Assembly Khursheed Shah also visited Awaran district.They were briefed about the destruction caused by the calamity and ongoing relief activities.The Balochistan chief secretary gave a briefing to the Punjab and Sindh chief ministers and interior minister about relief and rescue operation being carried out with the help of army.It was briefed that the administration’s top priority was to provide food and shelter to around 25,000 families affected by Tuesday’s devastating earthquake in which over 350 people were killed and hundreds others injured.The Sindh chief minister announced Rs50 million for the affectees, and said that 5,000 tents, other relief good were immediately being sent to the affected areas on part of his government.Khursheed Shah said they stood by their Baloch brethren in this difficult situation.Chief Minister Balochistan Dr Abdul Malik Baloch thanked the chief ministers of Punjab and Sindh for their visit to the affected areas and their cooperation with relief activities.He said if there was any hurdle for relief teams to access any affected area, the government should be informed.He said he had been reviewing the difficulties of people in Awaran and other affected areas and all resources would be utilized for relief of the affected people.